
   
   
      
         
            Annan-omous Threat

            
               USA
Today , the Washington Post , and the New York Times
lead with the U.N. Security Council's OK of the weapons inspection deal agreed
to last week by Kofi Annan and Saddam Hussein. The Los Angeles
Times goes with President Clinton's criticism of the congressional
movement towards a radical overhaul of the tax code.

            The Security Council voted 15-0 to approve the Annan deal, which opens up
eight of Saddam's presidential sites to U.N. inspectors. The papers report that
debate focused mainly on what would happen if Saddam reneges. The U.S. and
Britain wanted the Council to authorize automatic military action as part of
the accord, while other member countries, led by France, Russia, and China, did
not. In the end, there was no mention of automatic military moves, but merely a
warning of "the severest consequences." USAT and the WP stress
the U.N.'s warning, while the NYT stresses the U.S. failure to get
inclusion of an automatic attack. Despite this difference, everybody reports
that the U.S. position is that it doesn't need further approval for a strike if
the deal is abrogated.

            The Post reports that the U.N.'s resolution reiterates the intention
to consider ending the economic sanctions on Iraq once its weapons of mass
destruction have been eliminated. This news seems too important to leave to the
last paragraph, though.

            The LAT lead reports on a speech President Clinton gave Monday
in which he denounced the current vogue for wiping out the U.S. tax code in
favor of a radically new system. Clinton called the approach "misguided,
reckless and irresponsible," warning that it could imperil the economy. "No one
concerned about fighting crime would even think about saying, 'Well, three
years from now we're going to throw out the criminal code and we'll figure out
what to put in its place,'" the paper quotes Clinton as saying. "But that is
exactly what some people in Congress are proposing to do."

            This sounds like an important story--Zeitgeist and president on collision
course over taxes. Why then does the WP put it on p. 5, and the
NYT national edition bury it on p. 15?

            A Wall Street Journal editorial on Internet taxation
takes the position that Bill Clinton is right to support a sales tax
moratorium, and Trent Lott wrong to oppose it, because the Internet is "the
business infrastructure of the future," and hence its growth shouldn't be
"stifled" by taxes. Along the way, the editorial asks a fun tax question: "If a
man in California buys a birthday present for his mother in Illinois from a
company located in Georgia, in which state did the transaction take place?"

            Today's appearance of Vernon Jordan before the Starr grand jury gets
front-page coverage at the WP and a "Politics and Policy" piece at the
WSJ . USAT uses the occasion to do an informative
front-page primer on grand juries. The Tony Mauro/Kevin Johnson effort
reviews such basics as that the lawyers of those summoned have to wait outside
and that grand jurors can pose questions. There are also the nuggets that
England did away with grand juries fifty years ago and that in Hawaii they have
their own lawyer as a counterbalance to the prosecutor. And there's this grand
juror's question to Sidney Blumenthal during his appearance last week: "Do you
believe the public should be fully informed about the character of the
president?" Blumenthal's answer: "Yes, I do."

            In a WP front-page interview, Bill Gates says, referring
to the Justice Department's lawsuit, "If we can't innovate in our products,
then you know we will be replaced." The paper is struck by how far Gates'
behavior is from "the usual cautious demeanor of business leaders visiting
Washington," and finds him "roaring with indignation and disdain for those who
question his business practices."

            One of the key causes of press overkill of the sort we're now witnessing in
l'affaire Lewinsky is the papers' tendencies to do stories about
anything that has to do with Topic A, even if it would otherwise merit
virtually no news play. A good example is found in today's LAT "Column One" feature, which tells us that Walt Whitman,
"the poet of democracy, the poet of the body and soul," commands a loyal and
expansive following, and quotes a talking head from USC to drive home the
point. The real reason for the piece isn't revealed until the fifth paragraph:
Whitman's book Leaves of Grass "has a cameo in the investigation
involving President Clinton and former White House intern Monica Lewinsky."
What's next--a "Column One" about Leo Rosten and the history of "schmucko"?

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Genocide Chat

            The New York Times ,
Washington Post , and Los Angeles
Times lead with President Clinton's remark that the United States
should have done something quickly about the 1994 killings of half a million
people in Rwanda and having failed to do so, must share in the blame for them.
USA
Today goes with the developing story of the Arkansas schoolyard
shootings, which also gets a lot of coverage on the other fronts.

            Clinton's acknowledgement came during an emotionally charged stop at the
Kigali airport during which he and Hillary listened to the wrenching
recollections of massacre survivors. Given the prior day's discussion of the
wrongs of slavery, Clinton's remarks about the Rwandan genocide indicate, says
the WP , that his African sojourn is becoming a "contrition tour." But, points out the Post ,
yesterday's statement was different--with it, Clinton is referring to an
episode that occurred during his own administration. The paper points out that
Clinton suggested yesterday that one obstacle to taking action at the time was
a lack of credible information about what was actually going on. The paper also
notes that some human rights activists responded that there was ample reliable
information, just not ample White House will.

            The NYT reports that in his mea culpa du jour, Clinton also cited Bosnia as another example on his watch where the reaction to
ethnic killing was too slow. The Times does a good job of supplying
specifics on the U.S. inaction in Rwanda, noting that the Clinton
administration blocked a UN on-the-ground effort that "might have saved
hundreds of thousands of lives."

            Both the NYT and USAT Clinton-on-Rwanda pieces note a
political factor that at the time inhibited U.S. action, but which Clinton
didn't mention: Public support for U.S. involvement in peacekeeping missions
evaporated just prior to the Rwanda situation when 18 U.S. soldiers were killed
in an ambush in Somalia.

            The headline over the LAT 's Rwanda coverage is not a good model.
"Rwandans Told World Shares Guilt for Genocide" doesn't mention by whom, a
particularly oversight when the whom is the prez.

            The USAT lead states that the two Arkansas suspects--age 13 and
11--will be tried as juveniles. The NYT says their extreme youth means
conviction might result in sentences of just a few years. The LAT front
carries a piece about a new category of criminal suggested by such cases--the
"fledgling psychopath."

            A NYT op-ed says the incident implicates the too-ready access
young people have to guns. (They were apparently stolen from one of the boys'
grandfathers, but, notes the Times , in Arkansas it is perfectly legal
for an 11-year-old to own a rifle or shotgun.) And a WP editorial
reports, "The overall firearm-related death rate among U.S. children aged less
than 15 was nearly 12 times higher than among children in the other 25
industrialized countries combined."

            According to the Wall Street Journal , Jesse Jackson, who is accompanying
President Clinton on his African trip in his role as special envoy to Africa,
may have found his niche. Some in the foreign policy community, says the
Journal , which on the whole was wary of his appointment, already feel
Jackson is proving useful. For instance, on the current trip Clinton followed
Jackson's advice and had a lengthy phone conversation with the president of
Liberia to make sure he didn't feel snubbed because Clinton wasn't visiting his
country.

            Back to the Arkansas shootings for a sec: The papers, having learned the
suspects' names from school sources, opt to use them rather than invoking the
usual juvenile court practice of anonymity. "Today's Papers" would be
interested in finding out the general policy of the papers on such matters: Do
they print the names of juveniles whenever they learn them? Or only when the
crimes they're charged with are very serious?

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Electoral Collage

            The Washington Post goes with Kenneth Starr's request that the
Supreme Court bypass the ordinary appeals court process and directly decide on
an emergency basis whether President Clinton's White House lawyers and Secret
Service agents can be compelled to testify in the Monica Lewinsky
investigation. Primary election results lead at USA Today and
the metro edition of the New York
Times . The national edition of the NYT and the early edition of
the Los
Angeles Times lead with the decision by Merrill Lynch to pay a $400
million settlement for its role in the bankruptcy of California's Orange
County, but later LAT editions focus on California's primary
results.

            Much of the primary coverage centers on two California ballot initiatives:
the one calling for an end to the state's bilingual education program passed
(despite the opposition of all the major gubernatorial candidates, the PTA and
President Clinton). The one requiring unions to have their members individually
approve political uses of their dues will probably be defeated, albeit in a
fairly close vote. The NYT says the success of the anti-bilingualism
measure will pave the way for similar "assaults" on other such programs around
the country. (An interesting word-choice, illustrative of how in even the best
edited newspaper in the country, editorial tendencies can creep into a news
story. Would the Times describe an attempt to get more money for
unskilled laborers as an "assault" on the minimum wage?)

            The NYT , LAT and WP fronts all report that yesterday,
Monica Lewinsky dismissed her California medical malpractice attorney, William
Ginsburg, and replaced him with two experienced Washington criminal defense
lawyers, one of whom, Jacob Stein, is a former independent counsel. The
LAT and WP report that the new lawyers immediately sought to
improve their client's relations with Kenneth Starr by paying a courtesy call
to his office. The papers stress another post-Ginsburgian difference: standing
mute with their client before the assembled media.

            The Post goes into the most detail on the new team's legal
connections in town, its dispatch chockablock with law firm names. Everybody
looks down on lawyers who pay to advertise in the back of the paper. The goal,
apparently, is to be the kind of lawyer paid to be advertised in the front of
the paper. The Times interrupts its legal coverage to note that both of Monica's new guys are "well
tailored," with one "favoring customized French-cuff shirts" and the other
stepping out "in a chalk-stripe suit and spectator shoes." Do most readers know
what spectator shoes are? "Today's Papers" can only guess they are shoes so
expensive that most folks can only look at them in the store window, or on
their lawyers.

            That inquiry into the failure of U.S. intelligence to anticipate India's
nuclear tests, first tipped last week by the Wall Street Journal , has materialized on the front at
USAT and the NYT , and inside at the WP . The findings by
retired admiral David Jeremiah and his team: the intelligence community so
ignored the new Indian government's statements on nuclear policy that only one
U.S. analyst was assigned to examine satellite photos of India's test site.

            
               USAT 's "Money" section brings word that the chemical company FMC is
in serious talks with the federal government and Shoshone-Bannock Indian reps
to settle a lawsuit alleging that FMC's fifty-year-old shale extraction
operation at the tribe's southeastern Idaho reservation has left a significant
number of Native Americans with lung cancer and other respiratory illnesses.
The case, says the paper, could result in the largest fine in EPA history.

            A WSJ front-page feature reports on a virtually unnoticed obstacle to the flourishing of free
trade under NAFTA: There aren't enough bridges, rails and docks to handle all
the additional movement of goods the treaty sanctions. As a result, billions of
dollars of goods customarily sit for hours at the three borders involved, a
particular disaster in today's just-in-time inventory economy. Even though the
just-passed highway bill takes a crack at the problem, the real trouble, says
the Journal , is that any border infrastructure changes face a complex
international approval process that for instance, has meant one seven-mile
road/bridge project between the U.S. and Mexico has generated a fourteen-foot
pile of documents.

            The WP reports that Matt Drudge gave a speech yesterday at the National Press
Club. Plunging self-made into all that self-importance didn't seem to faze him.
"All truths begin as hearsay," Drudge said at one point. "Some of the best news
stories start as gossip. At what point does it become news? This is the
undefinable thing." When a questioner wondered how Drudge would fare at a news
outlet that requires 100 percent accuracy, he replied: "I don't know what
organization that would be."

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            White House of Blues

            
               USA
Today , the Washington Post , and the New York Times
all lead with the latest developments in the White House sex scandal. The
Los
Angeles Times goes another way, leading with the latest developments in
the White House money scandal (remember?).

            The Lewinsky matter moved Thursday on several fronts, which get covered to
varying degrees. The USAT lead reports that while denying any
obstruction of justice, Jordan said that he kept Bill Clinton informed about
his efforts to land Monica Lewinsky a private-sector job. USAT also has
the Post traumatic distress syndrome of Robert Bennett, one of Clinton's
private lawyers, as well as word that Ginsburg and Starr squared off before a
federal judge, but in both regards it leaves important details out. You have to
read the Post to learn that Bennett not only viewed the WP
deposition leak as "reckless, reprehensible and unethical" but also that he
said, "We are going to seek relief in court on this...." (Apparently, Bennett
didn't elaborate and the Post wasn't about to--after all, it's the
WP 's source Bennett is talking about going after.) And to learn that the
point of the closed hearing was so Ginsburg could try to convince a judge to
make Starr abide by a preliminary agreement to extend immunity to Lewinsky in
return for her testimony.

            Both the WP and NYT describe the wild scene outside the
courthouse, mobbed with press and topped off with anti-Clinton protestors
chanting, "Five-six-seven-eight! Married men don't date!"

            The two papers also detail Clinton's hot reaction to Thursday's Post
scoop: "the court has made it absolutely clear it is illegal to leak and
discuss" his deposition. Both papers report that all players in the
controversy--including Ken Starr and Paula Jones' lawyers--deny leaking the
depo. Also, the LAT front reports that Clinton "sternly refused" to
explain Thursday why in his deposition, he said he warned Monica L. that she
was likely to be called in the Jones case.

            The NYT lead plays catch-up on the depo story by pointing out that
the deposition's heavier than anticipated focus on Lewinsky makes sense of the
prior Times scoop about Betty Currie's testimony that, the day after,
Clinton went over with her the facts about his relationship with the intern.
The piece emphasizes how in the Clinton deposition account Currie is the
central figure, even to the point where it was her idea to get Monica a gift
when he went to Martha's Vineyard on vacation. The Times adds this
tidbit: Clinton said in his depo that previous accusations about drug dealing
and even murder had left him "paranoid."

            The LAT lead is the news that California campaign donor Johnny Chung,
who once compared the White House to a subway, where you need coins to open the
doors, will plead guilty to tax evasion, bank fraud and election law violations
in an agreement with the DOJ under which he will cooperation with the
Department's fund-raising investigation. The paper also reports that another
big Clinton donor suspected of funneling foreign money to the Democratic Party,
Yogesh Gandhi, was arrested Thursday on unrelated fraud charges as he prepared
to leave the country. The WP and NYT run the Chung story on their
front pages.

            The Wall Street Journal reports that military planners of
possible airstrikes against Iraq have become less confident of the U.S. ability
to bomb biological weapons sites in Iraq after a secret Air Force test in which
a special bomb that was expected to incinerate a stockpile of anthrax-like
germs instead spread them.

            While all the dailies were going front-page earlier this week with the news
that hands-on basketballer Latrell Sprewell was being given his millions back,
there was virtually no newsplay of his most recent escapade. It seems that on
Monday, Sprewell was involved in a car accident that sent two other people to
the hospital. The California Highway Patrol says Sprewell's Mercedes was
traveling at "high speed" when it struck sand barrel obstacles, hit a wall and
then collided with another car. Witnesses said they'd seen Sprewell speeding.
Perhaps the Highway Patrol fears another arbitrator in the wings. It didn't
give Sprewell a ticket. All this information comes from the only press coverage
"Today's Papers" is aware of--a brief AP item on page 4 of Tuesday's LAT
sports section. You know, where everyone put the news that OJ had pleaded no
contest to beating his wife.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Russian to Judgment

            Boris Yeltsin's dismissal of his entire cabinet leads at USA Today and
the New York Times .
The Washington Post goes with the Supreme Court's
decision to sidestep a "partial-birth abortion" case. (An FOTP coffee cup for
the reader who submits, the best alternative phrase, in TP's judgment, for the
procedure in question. How can someone be partially born? And doesn't
"Partial-birth abortion" seems about as logical as "partial-life execution?")
The Los
Angeles Times leads with the main economic reaction to yesterday's big
story about oil production cutbacks: a 13 percent rise in oil prices, the
biggest one-day percentage gain since the Gulf War.

            Yeltsin explained his move by saying his nation needed a fresh and powerful
team in place to pull it out of its social and economic crises. The biggest
name casualty was long-time Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin, widely viewed
as Yeltsin's heir apparent. In firing him, Yeltsin advised him to concentrate
on the next presidential elections, to be held in 2000. Odd or insincere
advice, given that the NYT says few give Chernomyrdin much of a chance
to win that election without the power of the PM's office or Yeltsin's
support.

            The NYT says theories about why Yeltsin fired everybody "swirled
through the capital like a cyclone." But give the Times credit for
putting forward its own clear suggestion: With Yeltsin's health problems much
in evidence of late, Russians were increasingly viewing Chernomyrdin as
Yeltsin's imminent successor, and "nothing infuriates Yeltsin more than the
suggestion that he has lost any of his political authority." The LAT ,
which runs Yeltsin on its front, also settles on this as the most likely
explanation.

            Although all the papers agree on the basic facts of the shake-up, their
takes on the emotions involved vary. The NYT says Yeltsin made his
stunning announcement in a "surprisingly folksy and conciliatory speech," while
WP says the speech was made by a "stiff-looking" Yeltsin, and the
LAT says he was "grim."

            The Post has some excellent detail on the mechanics of the firings.
Yeltsin, says the paper, met with Chernomyrdin in person and gave him a
farewell award for "Services to the Fatherland," while the other big names got
it in the neck on the phone. The Post account makes it clear that there
are Russian spin doctors too, by reporting that a Kremlin spokesman said
Yeltsin's moves "had been planned for a long time."

            The WP lead brings word that the Supreme Court, confronted with its
first chance to take up the issue of a particular vexed type of late-term
abortion, decided to punt, prompting an angry dissent from conservative
justices Thomas, Rehnquist and Scalia. On the other hand, abortion rights
advocates were cheered by the inaction. The non-move is also the USAT
off-lead, but doesn't make the front of the NYT or LAT . Both of
those papers find another judicial story more pressing: The California Supreme
Court's decision that the Boy Scouts can ban gays.

            The LAT , NYT , and WP fronts carry the news that the
federal government has indeed, as it first hinted over a week ago, decided to
try to block the Lockheed-Northrop merger.

            President Clinton's arrival in Ghana is front-page news at
the NYT , LAT , and WP . Clinton opened his 12-day tour of
Africa, says the NYT , by pledging more American interest and aid while
calling for a deeper African commitment to democracy and free markets. The
Times describes how the largest crowd Clinton ever spoke to--some half a
million Ghanians--surged against the barricades, threatening to "overwhelm the
president." The paper says Clinton, "his face contorted in anger, raged at the
crowd to get back." The picture on the NYT and WP fronts captures
the moment: It's the "Primary Colors" opening handshake gone mad. Clinton in
Africa also makes the LAT front.

            The WP reports that in the Lewinsky matter, the White House is
attempting to use its recently announced claim of executive privilege to cover
discussions involving not just presidential advisors like Bruce Lindsey and
Sidney Blumenthal, but also those involving Hillary Clinton. The paper points out that this indicates
how actively involved she has been in the White House response to the scandal.
Meanwhile, a NYT editorial calls the attempt to use executive privilege
in the controversy "an alarming attempt to extend presidential power."

            The Wall Street Journal "Work Week" column reports that
"Eighty-eight percent of CEOs surveyed anonymously report that they see a
connection between a worker's age and productivity. In a poll of 773 chief
executives in 23 countries, consultants Watson Wyatt Worldwide found that most
think productivity peaks around age 43." "Today's Papers" is sorry that the
Journal wasn't curious enough to find out the average age of those
CEOs.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            NYT Buries Lead!

            The Washington Post leads with indications that President
Clinton may drop his appeal of last week's court decision holding that his top
aides may be questioned by Kenneth Starr. The New York Times
goes with Clinton's comment Sunday that the U.S. would support new
international financial aid to Russia if its debt situation worsens. USA Today
leads with this year's big increase in killer tornadoes--nearly double the
twister death toll for all of 1997, and a 365 percent increase over the total
for 1996. The Los Angeles Times leads with the likelihood that Congress
will approve the most sweeping changes in bankruptcy law in decades--which will
make it significantly harder for those with annual family incomes over $50,000
to wipe out their debts. The WP lead is on the USAT front but no
others. Neither the NYT nor LAT leads are on anybody else's
front.

            Besides executive privilege, the WP reports that two other
legal decisions incident to the Lewinsky case must also be made soon: whether
the DOJ will challenge a court decision ordering Secret Service agents to
testify, and whether Clinton himself will testify before Starr's grand
jury.

            According to the NYT , Clinton's Sunday statement concerning debt assistance to Russia
was timed to spread calm among the Asian financial markets before they opened
for the week. A senior administration official tells the paper that direct U.S.
aid is not being contemplated, but rather IMF and World Bank monies, which
means 80 percent non-U.S. funds. The Times offers a helpful explanation
of the hoped-for result: once investors realize the U.S. and the international
funds are determined to support Russia, they will stop dumping the ruble, which
may mean that actually making the loans becomes unnecessary. This is, says the
NYT , "a form of deterrence theory." The story runs inside at the
WP .

            The Wall Street Journal runs a front-page story about how stockbrokers hustle clients . The techniques described
include pretending also to be on the phone with another client who just placed
a big order with the broker or who just made half a million dollars with him.
The big flaw with the story: it never says whether or not such ruses are
illegal.

            The LAT front points out a rather sticky dilemma now arising for the
U.S. in the wake of the new Asian arms race. The Indian and Pakistani nuclear
weapons are, the paper observes, probably, like the U.S. and Soviet programs of
the 50s and 60s, quite unsafe--vulnerable to both physical mishaps and command
and control mistakes. So the question is, should the U.S. help both countries
make their bombs safer? Although to do so would violate the new U.S. sanctions
imposed on both countries and could provoke international complaints that
America is spreading nuclear know-how, the LAT reports that "outside
analysts" think such a course of action is probably under consideration.

            A topic of immeasurable social and intellectual importance is very unwisely
buried deep inside the NYT business section: How could a story about
"Today's Papers" be so badly underplayed?

            A piece inside the WP reports that although the government has issued
30,000 letters authorizing the installation of airbag cut-off switches in cars and trucks, only 1,000 of
these have been accepted by auto dealers and service shops. The reason? These
facilities are worried about legal liability, but this doesn't add up, since
the story goes on to explain that the automakers have agreed to indemnify those
doing the cut-off work.

            The NYT has obtained a draft of a U.S. government report on Nazi gold taken from Jews--primarily as jewelry and teeth
fillings--during World War II, and writes it up on the top-front. Principal
findings: There was twice as much gold seized in this fashion as previously
estimated; it was used to pay--mostly in transactions handled by the Swiss
National Bank--for a huge share of Nazi war needs purchased from Portugal,
Spain, Sweden and Turkey; and two major German banks, Dresdner Bank and
Deutsche Bank, neither previously implicated and both now doing considerable
business in the U.S., had major roles in the transactions.

            Sunday's NYT "Week in Review" reports on the steady rise in volume
levels at the movies. The paper reports that a recent New York City showing of
"Bulworth" dwelt mostly in the vacuum cleaner range, except for when Warren
Beatty was rapping, taking things up to somewhere between jackhammer and car
horn. "Today's Papers" has been employing an effective countermeasure for
nearly twenty years: earplugs. These not only offer excellent protection from
hearing loss, but also from noisy theatergoers and inane movie dates.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Gore Tech

            
               USA
Today leads with the Senate's passage of a huge transportation-funding
plan, 38 percent larger than the one currently in effect. The New York Times
and Los
Angeles Times lead with the announcement that U.S. cancer rates have
declined in the past five years, reversing the trend of the previous twenty.
The Washington Post goes with the revelation that last
fall, just weeks after gaining China's pledge to halt assistance to Iran's
nuclear programs (elicited in return for allowing American firms to sell
nuclear reactors to China), the Clinton administration discovered and protested
China's secret negotiations with Iran regarding shipping it material used to
make weapons-grade uranium.

            The coverage of the transportation bill, which includes an LAT
front-pager and a piece inside the WP , generally stresses that its rich
provisions could be a budget buster. But the NYT front-page piece emphasizes a "little-noticed
provision" (noticed, however, also by USAT ) that would let employers
give workers up to $65 a month in tax-free mass-transit benefits (in the form,
for instance, of subway tokens and bus passes). This could, says the
Times , sharply cut the cost of train, bus and subway travel in New York
and elsewhere.

            The NYT notes that experts attribute the decline in new cancer cases
to changes in behavior, most notably a drop in smoking, and the decline in
deaths to increased screening and better therapies, but the paper also observes
that these positive trends are not equally benefiting all Americans.
"Minorities and women," says the Times , "remain particularly at risk."
While the USAT and WP front-page cancer pieces mention this, the
LAT cancer lead doesn't mention it before the "jump" to the inside.
Also, according to the graphic accompanying the NYT story, the biggest
increase seen in the most recent data is for melanoma of the skin, yet this
type of cancer isn't mentioned at all in the Times story proper.

            A piece on the WP front reports on an organized protest campaign of thousands of angry phone
calls, letters and e-mails directed at Merriam-Webster because of its current
dictionary's definition of "nigger" as "a black person--usually taken to be
offensive." The campaign was started by two Michigan women and has now been
joined by NAACP President Kweisi Mfume, who warns that if the company doesn't
bend, his organization will urge colleges and school systems not to buy its
dictionaries. The WP , historically very skittish in its treatment of
race, doesn't complicate the story with the inconvenient but true observation
that since most whites know better than to use the N-word epithet, and since it
has become a common phrase of salutation and even endearment among blacks, a
high proportion of its current usage is in fact as a synonym for "black
person."

            There's a lot of Al Gore's quote brilliance unquote suspiciously on display
today. The WP reports on its front that he literally dreamt of the idea
of making a live video image of the Earth as seen from space continuously
available on the Internet, and that after conducting twenty minutes of
Internet research, he quickly assembled a NASA team to make his dream a
reality. What's involved is launching a spacecraft that can be stationed 1
million miles from Earth. The WP reports that Gore suggests calling it
Triana, after Rodrigo de Triana, who Gore apparently knows to be, without
benefit of flashcards, the lookout on Columbus's ship who first sighted the New
World. Meanwhile, in the Wall Street Journal , Gore is depicted wowing the nation's
top computer executives with his fluent references to Immanuel Kant and Thomas
Kuhn. What controlling mental authority!

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            More Satellite Dish

            The Los
Angeles Times leads with the adverse affect on U.S. high technology
export businesses posed by the China/Loral satellite flap. The paper describes
the emergence of a trans-party coalition of anti-proliferationists ranging from
the liberal Rep. Edward Markey to the religious conservative Gary Bauer
(apparently, prolife does not entail proliferation). The Washington Post lead is the Loral CEO's proclamation of
innocence. The New York Times
goes with the U.S. military's increased dependence on reserve troops in
Bosnia.

            The WP lead is a near twin to the Sunday NYT front-page piece
on Loral CEO Bernard Schwartz. The broad outlines--that Schwartz has, since
first meeting Bill Clinton in 1992, been a big donor to President Clinton and
the DNC and that during that same time-frame, Loral has enjoyed solid
administration support for its efforts to sell communications technology to
China--are the same. And so are many of the details. There is one discrepancy.
The NYT suggests the oddity that despite all his donations, Schwartz had
been denied that supreme political plum, an overnighter in the Lincoln Bedroom.
The WP explains that he's been invited twice but his schedule has
prevented him from accepting.

            The focus of both pieces is Schwartz's denial that his largess was in any
way linked to his firm's increased access to China. Of course, when lobbying is
done skillfully, linking is unnecessary--the money speaks for itself. The
Times --but not the Post --makes the point, but not until after the
"jump," in the seventeenth paragraph.

            The NYT lead reports a striking fact: more Army reservists have been
called up for active duty in Bosnia than were called up during all of Vietnam,
and the episode marks the first time in nearly thirty years that a National
Guard combat unit has been shipped overseas. Unfortunately, the piece focuses
on the grousing of called-up reservists, instead of on the most important
question it raises--whether our part-time soldiers are trained well enough to
be depended on this way.

            The LAT 's "Column One" brings out another overlooked consequence of
military downsizing. Seems that budget cuts have forced the Pentagon to stop
supplying honor guards to most military funerals, and this role is now often
filled by elderly veterans.

            An excellently reported piece detailing how the U.S. missed India's nuclear
preparations appears on the NYT 's page three. (Can't imagine why it's
not Page One. Surely it's more pressing than George W. Bush's campaign doings.)
According to the Times , the failure was a "team effort," requiring flubs
by the State Department, the CIA, the Pentagon and the National Security
Council. The piece notes that three days before the Indian explosions, a
satellite recorded bulldozers appearing near the test site, but that this
didn't set off any alarm bells. But the piece doesn't say why. Surely this is
some sort of human breakdown, because the current generation of spy satellites
download their take in real time. Furthermore, says the NYT , early on
the morning of the test explosions, "one lonely analyst" saw a photo of fences
being removed, but it took four or five hours before more experienced officers
arrived to review the evidence. The Times doesn't say why they weren't
already there. "Today's Papers" can handle that one--because the more
experienced officers have rank, and insist that rank has its privileges, like
working during the daytime. Isn't that dumb? And isn't it lucky it was only a
test ?

            The LAT op-ed page runs a piece by a University of Chicago law
professor that promises "How to Stop Mass Public Shootings." The prof's
suggestion? Let citizens (without criminal records) carry concealed weapons.
Now, do you think if the teachers (and the other students, for that matter) at
that Oregon school had also been armed, that would have made the cafeteria
situation safer? After all, the boy pulled a knife on the cops in the police
station after he was arrested, and presumably he knew they were armed.
The professor adduces some statistics for his side purporting to show that the
availability of concealed weapons lessens the occurrence of what he calls
"multiple-victim public shootings." Unfortunately, he defines the notion into
irrelevance: it doesn't include gang shootings or shootings that are the
byproducts of another crime. (which means he couldn't even include the
Oregon shootings, because carrying a gun in school is another crime). In other
words, he excludes just about every shooting. The tip-off is that he notes (in
the seventh paragraph) that there are "21 such shootings annually"--not too
statistically significant, given that there are nearly 20,000 gun deaths per
year. Thank God for tenure, or this guy might be running a police department
somewhere.

            Headline writers and editors at the NYT were mostly home barbecuing
on Sunday. How else to explain the headline on page six of the national
edition: "Sukarno & Company: Out, Yes, but Still Hugely Rich"? Hey guys,
it's Suharto.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Elvis Leaves the Building

            Finally, after a solid week, some of the big dailies lead with monographs
that aren't Monicagraphs. The Washington Post leads with the indictment of Clinton
intimate Charlie Trie and another Democratic Party fund-raiser--the first in
connection with the Department of Justice's investigation into the 1996
campaign. (This story is the off-lead at the Los Angeles
Times , but the New York
Times runs it deep inside.) And the LAT goes with Madeleine
Albright's pronouncement that if allies can't be convinced, the U.S. is ready
to launch military strikes against Iraq on its own. Albright added that the
diplomatic string is running out and reiterated the U. S. position: U.N.
weapons inspectors must have unconditional access to Iraqi sites. (Elsewhere,
this story doesn't get that much play either: at the NYT it only gets a
reefer on the front page, below the fold.) USA Today
leads with a new poll indicating the strength of President Clinton's
post-scandal popular support, and the NYT goes with new details about
the last White House meeting between Bill and Monica.

            
               USAT says its new poll (of 684 adults, done in concert with CNN and
Gallup) shows that after his State of the Union speech, Clinton enjoys his
highest approval rating ever--67 percent. The paper also reports that former
White House chief of staff Leon Panetta was questioned yesterday by
prosecutors. (This news is also flagged in the Wall Street Journal front-page news box and on the
NYT front.) USAT also states that Starr investigators picked up
evidence from a former teacher of Monica Lewinsky's, who says he had an affair
with her.

            The paper also offers a glimpse into Monica's vie en scandale: long days
sequestered in the Watergate with her mother, watching TV and talking on the
phone in code. Her lawyer is quoted saying that she watched Clinton's SOTU
address. "She thought he did a good job with it," he says. "She thinks he's
done a good job as president. She still considers him a friend."

            Pursuing a thread first pulled by yesterday's LAT , the NYT and WP delve into that December 28th White House meeting
between the president and his ex-intern, prompted by her concerns over a
subpoena in the Paula Jones case. The Times reports Lewinsky claims that
Clinton told her at the time that she could testify her visits to him at the
White House were to see his secretary, and that he suggested that she could
avoid testifying altogether by being in New York City. The paper goes on to
point out that besides the issue of what Clinton actually said at this meeting,
it would be "ethically questionable" for a defendant in a civil lawsuit merely
to discuss the case with a potential witness already subpoenaed by the
plaintiffs.

            The Times says this meeting was confirmed by a White House aide,
while the Post says the White House declined to comment about it and has
refused to release the relevant entry logs.

            The LAT front and the NYT inside report an
increase in the number of applications to the University of California from
blacks (up 4.9 percent) and Latinos (up 7 percent). This confounds
much-publicized concerns that the school's decision to end affirmative action
last year would have a chilling effect on minority applications.

            Dick Morris' verbal incontinence yesterday about Bill and Hillary's sex
lives seems to have had immediate results. White House spokesman Mike McCurry
tells the Post that, although in recent weeks Clinton would occasionally
talk to Morris, "I doubt that will ever happen again."

            A big color shot of the president greeting an exuberant crowd of young
people sits athwart the NYT lead story about the Monica meeting and
astride its story about his trip yesterday to the Midwest. From just one
glance, it's hard to say which story the picture goes with. In a way, it goes
with both. It was in fact taken yesterday at Clinton's appearance at the
University of Illinois. But it captures the very same hands-on political body
chemistry apparent in those shots we've all seen by now of Bill with Monica.
Indeed, of the eleven people in the photograph looking up at and/or reaching
for Clinton, eight of them are women. They are all smiling at him.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Journalism's Pellet Surprise

            
               USA
Today and the Los Angeles Times lead with the latest U.S. economic news:
surging growth but the slowest rate of inflation increase in 35 years. The top
national story at the Washington Post is President Clinton's hard-nosed
self-defense at his first press conference in months. The New York Times
metro edition goes with the Senate's overwhelming approval of NATO expansion
(the earlier, national edition goes with the tax evasion indictment of
already-once-convicted Felon of Bill, Webster Hubbell).

            The WP coverage of the presidential press
conference--accompanied by a picture of a pugnacious double-fisted
Clinton--reports that he dismissed allegations about his character as the work
of organized foes "unable to counter his ideas or record," but acknowledged
that seven years of their attacks have diminished his personal standing with
the American people. This used to distress him greatly, said Clinton, but not
anymore. The paper observes that nearly half of the questions posed by the
press concerned his still-unexplained relationship with Monica Lewinsky, but
that despite his January promise to illuminate it, Clinton didn't answer
them.

            The NYT wash-up of the NATO vote explains that all 16
current members of the alliance must approve the change in order for it to take
effect. ( USAT 's front page NATO story says that such total approval is
expected by the alliance's 50th anniversary summit in Washington next year.)
The Times piece also includes a workmanlike exposition of the politics
of the vote, including the observation that expansion was supported by the U.S.
defense industry, which stands to "reap huge profits" from increased weapons
sales to new NATO members.

            The WP front features new federal statistics about teen birth rates (the story
runs inside at the NYT ) indicating that for the first time they are down
among every racial and ethnic group. Oddly, neither story includes any data on
teen out-of-wedlock birth rates. Highlights: The African-American teen
birthrate is down 21 percent since 1990--its lowest level ever. Hispanic teens,
while still the most prolific, have experienced a rate drop for the first time.
Non-Hispanic white teens are still almost three times less likely to become
mothers than either Hispanics or blacks.

            Earlier this week, the WP took a front-page look at the Pentagon's
troubled and expensive history with anti-missile defense systems. Today, a new
development in the arena gets covered by the Post , but is relegated to
the business section. Curious, since yesterday's award to Boeing of a contract
to develop a missile shield could be worth up to $5.1 billion. The LAT
whispers the story the same way. Which, is, of course, the way the defense
contractors like it.

            The Wall Street Journal front features an excellent story
uncovering a little-known problem: racial discrimination in farm loans. The paper describes
the attempts by some struggling black farmers to get restitution from the USDA.
Thus far, despite a four-hour meeting with President Clinton and an admission
by USDA secretary Dan Glickman that his department had swept the problem under
the rug, as well as numerous specific findings of illegal denials of loans, the
farmers are still waiting to be made whole. Scandalous.

            The LAT front covers a sensational, disturbing story likely to be much discussed in the
days ahead. Yesterday, during L.A.'s rush hour, near one of the city's busiest
intersections, a distraught man killed himself with a shotgun blast to the
head--while many Angelenos watched on one or another of the local TV stations'
live broadcasts. Afterwards, most of the stations expressed regret for the
coverage and some offered counseling to viewers.

            The episode could have a number of important consequences: Before taking his
life, the man had unfurled a banner reading: "HMOs are in it for the money!!
Live Free. Love Safe or Die." So perhaps the suicide will further crystallize
the discussion of the impersonality of managed care. (Why, by the way, didn't
the LAT mention the sexual disease-- probably AIDS--angle?) And perhaps
it will break the back of the L.A. trend of automatically going with
(invariably highly rated) live broadcasts of potentially violent freeway
incidents.

            The Hubbell indictment gets lots of ink and produces the day's strangest
quote. "The office of independent counsel could indict my dog. They can indict
my cat. But I'm not going to lie about the president. I'm not going to lie
about the first lady or anyone else." Hubbell's wife, who was indicted along
with him, must have been thrilled with this disclosure of the true family
pecking order.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            NATO's Rocky Road

            The LAT leads with the U.S. stating that finally, Iraq has really been
cooperating with U.N. weapons monitoring efforts. The top national story at the
NYT is the Senate's debate about widening NATO. The WP leads with the decision
by federal corruption investigators to let Jimmy Hoffa's son, James P. Hoffa,
run for the Teamsters presidency. USAT goes with the Treasury Department's
launch of an investigation into the tactics of the IRS' criminal division.

            The American admission was made Monday at the U.N. by U.S. Ambassador Bill
Richardson, about inspections of Iraq's nuclear program and previously
off-limits government buildings. But he went on to say that the U.S. continues
to oppose any relaxation of economic sanctions on Iraq or in the U.N.'s weapons
inspection program, citing, notes the LAT , Iraq's continuing
insufficient cooperation in the areas of long-range missiles and chemical and
biological weapons. This story also makes the fronts at USAT and the
NYT , but the latter emphasizes the U.N.'s decision Monday night to
extend sanctions despite Richardson's conciliatory remarks.

            The nuances of the administration's thinking about sanctions are on display
in a NYT front-page piece that depicts Bill Clinton at a White House
meeting of Christian evangelical leaders, unaware that a Times reporter
was there too. Clinton asked the group to withdraw its support for legislation
aiming to reduce religious persecution overseas by imposing sanctions because
he said such bills put enormous pressure on whoever is in the executive branch
to fudge an evaluation of the facts of what is going on." The president needs
flexibility, he said, including the ability to impose sanctions.

            The NYT line on the NATO expansion discussion is that this is a quite
important issue that wasn't receiving its due in the Senate until yesterday,
when "after four hours of dueling monologues, however, something novel
happened: Debate broke out." But judging by the Times examples, it
wasn't exactly Lincoln-Douglas. There was Sen. Joseph Biden saying, "The worst
time to enlarge an alliance is at a moment of threat. This is the time and the
moment, nine years after the wall has come down, to end once and for all the
artificial boundaries," with Sen. Robert Smith responding, "They picked winners
and losers at Yalta. We are picking winners and losers here." (The Times
helpfully explains that Biden is for expansion, Smith against.) And there's
Sen. Jesse Helms' contribution: "The European Union could not fight its way out
of a wet paper bag."

            The LAT lead editorial sees the Senate in a "reckless rush" to
approve NATO expansion, stating that supporters have pressed their case with
slogans, not arguments. The NYT notes that ice cream mogul Ben Cohen of
Ben and Jerry's is actively campaigning against expansion. In Thomas Friedman's
column, Cohen explains why: Expanding NATO would be like Ben and Jerry's still
wanting to drive Haagen-Dazs out of business even if H-D had switched to making
hot dogs. The problem here is that Russia hasn't gotten rid of its, er.ice
cream machines.

            The reader who makes it down to the fifteenth paragraph of the WP
lead gets schooled on what it means to be a clean Teamster. That's where it
says that the federal investigator who gave Hoffa the green light fined him and
several of his running mates in the last union election more than $40,000 for
receiving improper campaign contributions, and held that Hoffa "did not testify
accurately" about his personal involvement in the preparation of campaign
finance reports. By contrast, the NYT , in its front-page Teamsters
story, broaches this point in the first paragraph, and observes in the fourth
paragraph that as a result of the negative findings about Hoffa, neither side
in the upcoming Teamsters election can run as an untainted reform
candidate.

            The WSJ "Work Week" column notes that the machinists union has licensed a
special collector's item for its 110th anniversary: a Winchester Model 94
rifle. Wait till the postal workers union hears about this.

            That NYT piece that caught Bill Clinton speaking off the cuff about
sanctions also includes his confession that late at night he often gets a call
from Chelsea asking him about some item from the next day's paper that she's
read on the Internet, but that he knows nothing about. Mr. President, may
"Today's Papers" humbly suggest."Today's Papers"?

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Fashioning Paula

            
               USA
Today leads with Texas' settlement of its product-liability lawsuit
against the leading tobacco companies. The top nonlocal story at the Washington Post is the latest development in the Indonesian
economic crisis--a rare and boosterish Suharto press conference in contrast to
a further plunging stock market and food riots in outlying towns. The New York Times
leads with a comprehensive poll about American attitudes concerning
abortion.

            In the Texas case, reports USAT , the defendant companies have agreed
to pay about $15 billion over 25 years to reimburse the state for expenses it
incurred in the treatment of smoking-related illnesses. That makes Texas the
third state to settle such a case, joining Florida and Mississippi. There are,
says the paper, a total of 40 such suits on file, with Minnesota's turn coming
next week.

            The Wall Street Journal states that the plaintiffs' lawyers
hired by Texas to try the case will receive as part of the deal almost $2.2
billion in fees.

            The NYT abortion survey, the first conducted by the paper since 1989, was
based on telephone interviews of 1,101 people and detects "a notable shift from
general acceptance" of having the procedure: from 40 percent to 32 percent. And
the pollsters also detected an increasingly acute sensitivity to abortion
timing: Sixty-one percent of those polled thought abortions should be permitted
during the first trimester, but only 15 percent in the second and just 7
percent in the third. (The piece notes that this last stat helps explain why a
focus on partial-birth abortions has proven politically advantageous for
abortion foes.) Nearly 45 percent of those asked to state the present law on
abortion could not give the correct answer.

            The WSJ notes that the just-concluded football/TV deal will probably
mean even steeper cable bills in the near future. Some local cable
companies, the paper says, expect the fees they'll pay ESPN to go up more than
20 percent. And they're in the habit of passing expenses along to Joe Remote.
Even nonsports fans will be affected, notes the Journal , because ESPN is
usually part of basic cable service. (Which raises the question: Hasn't
technology progressed to a point that would allow cafeteria-style programming
choices by subscribers?)

            A scan of the headlines found cheek-by-jowl on the WP 's Page A6
provides an interesting snapshot of the life of the modern Cabinet officer:
"[Ex-HUD Secretary] Cisneros's Ex-Mistress Pleads Guilty," "[Labor Secretary]
Herman Denies Allegations of Influence-Selling Scheme," and "Two Tyson Foods
Executive Indicted Over Gifts to [Ex-Agriculture Secretary] Espy."

            The WSJ reports that, according to an MIT survey, Americans are twice
as likely to back a tax increase going toward the search for extraterrestrials
than one for gene-cloning research.

            The NYT reports that today's issue of the journal Science will
describe an experiment in which people's biological clocks were reset three
hours by shining a bright light on the back of their knees. The finding, if it
holds up, says the Times , may lead to a simple way for airline travelers
to fight jet lag.

            Yesterday's Los Angeles Times ran a story under the headline "Paula
Jones Works on Her Court Appearance," which, illustrated by pictures of Jones,
was all about the various looks she's had since stepping on the public stage.
The piece concluded that she's finally graduated to an image that's
"sophisticated yet soft." Today's WP "Style" section (that's the
opposite of substance, remember) picks up that ball and runs with it, with a
lengthy discourse on the new PJ. "It is," hyperventilates
the Post , one of the most jaw-dropping public make-overs ever." Jones
apparently has "smoothed the frizzy mane of curls that once reached to such
dazzling heights. Her makeup is now subtle and based on natural, not neon,
hues. Her clothing is inspired by the boardroom instead of the secretarial
pool. She has embraced the markers of dignity, refinement and power." In true
newspaper overkill fashion, the piece backs this up by consulting Cynde Watson,
national makeup artist for Bobbi Brown Essentials, and Steven Zdatny, a
historian at West Virginia University specializing in the aesthetics and
politics of hair.

            The placement of these two pieces is a PR triumph, but one carrying the
seeds of its own destruction: If people know all this work is going into making
Paula Jones seem a certain someone, doesn't that just make it obvious that
she's really somebody else?

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Never Say Never?

            President Clinton's new forceful denial about Monica L. leads everywhere. At
what might be called the tail-end of a White House event highlighting Clinton
education and child-care proposals, with Hillary at his side, the president
stated, "I did not have sexual relations with that woman, Miss Lewinsky. I
never told anybody to lie. Not a single time. Never."

            All the dailies feature a picture of Bill Clinton alongside their stories
about his denial. USA Today 's has him looking the angriest. The Washington Post says Clinton clenched his jaw and glared as
he made his denial. USAT reports that although Clinton's statement
itself and follow-up remarks by aides seem to make it utterly unambiguous,
Monica Lewinsky's lawyer responded by suggesting that still, Lewinsky may say
that she and the president engaged in an act other than intercourse. "What's
the president's definition of sex?" he asked.

            Another development that engrosses the dailies is the news that Lewinsky's
lawyer has given Kenneth Starr a formal statement about the testimony she could
give in the matter in return for immunity. USAT suggests the proffer
includes an admission of sex with Clinton, which, the paper says, an earlier
draft did not.

            The WP says that one person who saw Clinton over the weekend quotes
the president's response to the widely circulated story that Lewinsky received
a dress as a gift from him: "There is no dress." But the New York Times
front cites two sources saying that Lewinsky met privately with Clinton at the
White House late last month. The visit is alleged to have come two weeks after
Lewinsky was served with a subpoena in the Paula Jones case and one week before
Lewinsky signed an affidavit swearing that she had not had a sexual
relationship with Clinton.

            A sign of the scandal's impact: The news at the WP that a major point
of tonight's State of the Union address will be Clinton's pitch to apply
prospective budget surpluses to shore up Social Security couldn't make it above
the fold. By the way, the paper reports that several White House aides will
visit the Hill today to encourage lawmakers to applaud.

            The NYT notes that Clinton's poll numbers are still pretty good, but
also says some of his longstanding allies were not reassured by Clinton's
statement. The Los Angeles Times lead says it did buoy his supporters.
Another LAT front-page piece reports that the "crisis cabinet" assembled
to respond to the scandal includes the doubly qualified Dick
Morris, both an experienced Clinton advisor and a sex scandalee in his own
right.

            The Wall Street Journal front reports that Compaq has purchased
Digital Equipment. The story points out how in just ten years Compaq has come
from nowhere and that Digital has pretty much gone in the opposite direction.
The deal, says the Journal , puts Compaq in position to compete directly
with IBM and Hewlett-Packard. This story is also on the front at the WP ,
NYT , and the LAT .

            The U.N.'s chief weapons inspector, Richard Butler, tells the NYT about the Iraqi cat-and-mouse
games he's had to endure, such as being stalled for twenty minutes while Iraqi
computer guys replaced hard drives containing records of the country's entire
weapons program with ones running only computer games. Butler confirms earlier
reports that his team had evidence that Saddam has loaded biological weapons
onto missile warheads.

            Right now, no one is paying the least little attention to military
procurement--which is the way the military likes it. So there won't be much
newsplay for the piece inside today's Post about how the Navy has
managed to keep its hot new airplane program rolling along despite a continuing
serious aerodynamic problem.

            The NYT 's Thomas Friedman speaks for many when he writes of the
particular betrayal he feels right now. "We overlooked Mr. Clinton's past
indiscretions--he was hardly the first politician with testosterone
overload--on the condition that he pursue his agenda and postpone his next
dalliance until after he left the White House. But he broke the bargain. I knew
he was a charming rogue with an appealing agenda, but I didn't think he was a
reckless idiot with an appealing agenda."

            The WP points out that the scandal has been good media business, with
USAT distributing an extra 500,000 copies of its weekend edition, the
WP printing about 15,000 copies of its daily run, Time adding
100,000 copies to its usual newsstand run of 250,000, CNN's viewership up about
40 percent, and ABC's "Nightline" and "This Week" experiencing pronounced
ratings increases. But, notes the Post , neither the Globe nor the
National Enquirer is seeing much of a bump. (But when those Monica
topless shots show up, don't look for them in Congressional
Quarterly .)

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            1,001 Arabian Naughts

            Saudi Arabia's hesitance about involvement in any U.S. military action
against Iraq is the top story at USA Today , the Washington Post , and the New York Times .
The USAT headline stresses the Saudi balk, while the headlines at the
Post and NYT focus on the U.S. acceptance of it.

            
               USAT , like the other dailies, passes along the statement made Sunday
by the Saudi defense minister to the effect that while his country supports
Saddam's compliance with the U.N. inspection effort, it does not favor an
attack on the nation or the people of Iraq. But unlike the Post and the
Times , the paper doesn't illuminate this comment by describing the cold,
hard military consequences. Those papers point out that the U.S. decision not
to press the issue has meant that it has amassed much striking power elsewhere.
The Post gives this order of battle: "F-117 stealth aircraft and A-10
fighter jets at Kuwait's Jabir Air Base, B-1 bombers and F-16 and F-15 fighter
jets at Bahrain's Sheik Isa Airfield, F-14 and F-18 fighter jets on two
carriers, cruise missiles on a number of other ships and B-52 bombers on the
British island of Diego Garcia." (Wonder if this means anything to the average
reader. Wonder if it means anything to the Post : the A-10 isn't a
fighter and the F-18 is a fighter-bomber.) The Post further explains
that the Saudi stance is also a diplomatic blow, denying the U.S. a potential
signal of allied unity.

            The Post says the Saudi stance has to do with its aversion to
involvement with any U.S. attack that doesn't have the objective of eliminating
Saddam. But the paper delays explaining the logic until the story's 15th
paragraph: The Saudis are afraid that a mere air campaign will leave behind a
Hussein vengeful towards Gulf neighbors that supported it.

            The NYT points out Saudi Arabia will probably grant fly-over
privileges to American bombers taking off from elsewhere.

            The Times states that likely U.S. strike targets include Republican
Guard bases, military command centers and suspected weapons factories and
stockpiles. Also, the paper reports an apparent shift in U.S. policy about
Israeli self-defense against any Iraqi attacks. Last week, it notes, Secretary
of Defense William Cohen urged Israel to refrain from retaliating, but Sunday
he was quoted as granting Israel the right of self-defense.

            
               USAT reports the next phase of the Starr investigation: talking to
current and former White House interns as a check on Monica's story. The
WSJ says it's very unlikely Starr will bring criminal charges against
President Clinton while he's in office, but that he will probably dump the
matter into Congress' lap as a potential impeachment case, thus plunging the
country into a "wrenching political dilemma" given the president's surging
popularity. The Journal goes on to note that Starr in on record with a
rather loose interpretation of what counts as an impeachable offense, reporting
that he once argued before the Supreme Court that poisoning the neighbor's cat might be impeachable.

            The Journal reports that the FTC is set to end decades of leniency
regarding cigars. Apparently, the agency is moving towards requiring stogie
makers to report their ad and promotion budgets. And is considering further
steps such as: requiring cigar ads to carry a Surgeon General's health
warning.

            Sunday's Los Angeles Times reports that according to a recently
released man, Iraqi prisons have been the site of hundreds, perhaps thousands,
of executions of political prisoners and common criminals in the latter part of
1997.

            The NYT , in the wake of the Karla Faye Tucker execution, ran in
Sunday's "Week in Review" a brutally reported and mug-shot illustrated piece by
Sam Howe Verhovek on some of the other women waiting on America's Death Rows.
The piece convinces the reader that Tucker's pickax is not an anomaly: "Among
the ways condemned women have killed in this country are shooting with an
AK-47, slicing with a box cutter, injecting with battery acid, and beating with
a baseball bat. One drowned her paralyzed son by pushing him off a canoe on a
family outing, leaving him and his 50 pounds of metal leg braces to sink to the
bottom."

            The WP says that the Paula Jones trial judge has had an interesting prior run-in
with Bill Clinton. Seems that in law school, she was a student in a course on
admiralty law that Clinton taught. And he lost a bunch of exams including hers.
Kind of amazing those exams didn't eventually turn up in the private quarters
at the White House.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Iraq and Roll?

            
               USA
Today leads with the diplomatic efforts being undertaken to avoid U.S.
military action against Iraq. The Los Angeles
Times lead describes those efforts too, but emphasizes the nature of
the likely U.S. military response. The Washington Post leads with Madeleine Albright's frustration
with the Israeli-Palestinian impasse. And the New York Times
goes with the Clinton budget strategy.

            
               USAT reports that besides Albright's whirlwind tour of the Middle
East, Iraq-related diplomacy is also being undertaken by Russia and France.
Also, the U.N.'s Kofi Annan has proposed loosening the strictures governing
Iraq's oil sales as an incentive for Iraqi cooperation with U.N. inspectors and
Albright said she supports that. Albright was in Kuwait yesterday and is bound
for Saudi Arabia today. An AP dispatch quoted in both USAT and the WSJ
states that the Saudis will not allow any Iraq strikes to originate from their
country.

            
               USAT also says Newt Gingrich has signaled strong support for action
against Saddam, while his colleague Richard Armey has stressed the need for
prior Congressional review of any attack plan.

            The LAT lead headline is quite clear: "U.S. Would Hit Iraq Hard
Despite the Likely Costs." But the text is anything but. High up, the reader is
told only that the U.S. game plan calls for taking "substantial military
action," which aims to "destroy key military props supporting Iraqi President
Saddam Hussein and affirm principles for the post-Cold War world." Reading
further on the front page does reveal the possibility of an expanded no-fly
zone, but mainly yields the "information" that after the action, the U.S. will
"put in place a post-strike program that would strengthen and potentially
broaden the U.N. mandate inside Iraq," which the reader "learns," will
"reconstitute" the U.N. weapons inspection team to "make it more effective as
it searches for weapons."

            A nationwide poll that the LAT plays big both in an off-lead
story and a big top-of-the-page graphic suggests that by a large margin
Americans support the use of force against Iraq and additionally think the
purpose of an airstrike should be to remove Saddam Hussein from power. Most
respondents also dismiss the suggestion that President Clinton is preparing a
move against Iraq as a means of distracting attention from his own
problems.

            The WP lead reports that in separate meetings Secretary of State
Albright privately scolded Israel and Palestinian leaders, telling them she is
"sick and tired of hearing you give me a pile full of complaints about the
other guy." The Post credits this quotation to "a senior U.S. official
with direct knowledge of the conversations." The NYT in its Albright
story sources the comment the same way. (Gee, given that the scoldings were
private, and that the knowledge was direct, who could that be?)

            The WP , like USAT , also mentions Albright's pledge to Israel
of an "iron-clad commitment" to defend Israel in case it is attacked by Iraq,
but doesn't include Netanyahu's response, reported by USAT , that unlike
in 1991 during the Gulf War, Israel will now feel free to defend itself. The
NYT front-page Albright piece adds a further wrinkle, noting that
Albright responded, "It is up to each country to determine its own way to
defend itself."

            The NYT lead points out that the main new social programs of the
Clinton budget--such as child-care programs and new teacher hiring--are linked
to congressional approval of the national tobacco settlement. And if Congress
fails to enact the tobacco deal thereby killing these programs, says the paper,
Democrats come away with a potent political issue: the Republicans favored the
tobacco industry over children and health. The Wall Street Journal 's Alan Murray thinks there will be some
sort of tobacco legislation this year. Congress, he says, is moving towards
enacting the parts of the settlement the tobacco companies don't like while
denying them the part they want--immunity from future lawsuits.

            The WSJ reports that the GDP jumped 4.3 percent for the last quarter
of 1997 and that for all of 1997, the economy grew 3.8 percent, the best rate
in ten years.

            The most newsy development in what "Today's Papers" had decided to call the
Whitefluid scandal is that yesterday, as reported in the WP , Monica
Lewinsky's lawyer revealed on one of his five (!) chat show appearances that
it's possible his client, who owns a share of a Australian condo, was
tape-recorded offering it to Linda Tripp in return for Tripp denying knowing
about Lewinsky's claim that she had a sexual relationship with President
Clinton.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Fewer People of Color TV?

            
               USA
Today leads with the FAA's announcement Tuesday of a new airline safety
agenda designed to cut crashes by 80 percent over the next ten years, primarily
by reducing engine explosions and episodes of flying unaware into the ground.
The Los
Angeles Times leads with a new study coming out in JAMA today
concluding that properly prescribed drugs kill more than 100,000 people a year,
far more than previously believed. (The study is also covered on the WP
and USAT front pages.) The New York Times
lead is the decision by a federal court voiding the government rule requiring
that television and radio stations seek minority job applicants. The Washington Post goes with the head of the Office of
Management and Budget leaving to run Fannie Mae.

            The NYT explains that the court decision could have far-reaching impact on broadcasters and the future of
affirmative action because it's the first time that a federal appeals court
has evaluated an affirmative action program that used not quotas but goals. In
effect, the court said it didn't see the difference, holding that goals still
tended to promote numerical targets and hence hiring on purely racial grounds.
The paper notes that although the FCC's affirmative action hiring goals also
target women, this decision does not address those, although experts say the
decision will probably lead to eventual challenges of them as well. The
NYT notes that this is the second time in four years a major FCC
affirmative action program has been overturned: three years ago Congress did
away with tax breaks for companies selling broadcast stations to
minorities.

            The LAT front plus inside stories in the NYT and WP
detail how two containers filled with 12,000 gallons of napalm are still riding the rails--destination
still unknown--after the Chicago facility that was to recycle the shipment
decided not to accept it, on the heels of protests from several midwestern
members of Congress. The WP coverage refers to the substance as a
"Vietnam-era" weapon and states that the U.S. military discontinued its use a
quarter century ago. On the other hand, the NYT says, "In the gulf war,
allied forces reportedly dropped napalm canisters on Iraqi fortifications and
tank obstacles." Which is it?

            The Justice Department and Kenneth Starr are battling over who should
investigate whether or not some of conservative money-man Richard Mellon
Scaife's dough ended up being paid to Starr witness David Hale to influence his
Whitewater testimony against Bill Clinton. Meanwhile, reports the NYT ,
the new publisher of The American Spectator , Terry Eastland, is trying
to find out what became of the nearly $2 million in Scaife grants to investigate Clinton the
magazine received. So far, it appears, says the paper, much of it went to the
two men administering it. Eastland says David Henderson, of the magazine staff
and Stephen Boynton, a lawyer, paid themselves fees of $12,000 and $15,000 per
month respectively.

            The Pulitzers were awarded yesterday and the dailies took their annual
opportunity to say nice things about themselves in straight news stories (the
Washington Post was able to go with the front-page headline, "Katharine
Graham, Philip Roth Win Literary Pulitzers"). It remains curious to "Today's
Papers" however, that plays and books (and string quartets) can win
journalism's most esteemed prize, but magazines cannot. (Not to mention on-line
magazines.)

            The WP reports that National Journal columnist Stuart Taylor
was dropped yesterday from his regular position on the "NewsHour with Jim
Lehrer." Lehrer said on last night's broadcast that "we believe Stuart's recent
commentaries in print and on other TV programs about the Starr investigation
have caused some blurring of the lines and confusion about his role with us."
What Lehrer was beating around the bush about is that Taylor recently admitted
he'd talked to Ken Starr about coming to work for him, and then decided not to.
It's far from clear to "Today's Papers" why this is any kind of a firing
offense. First of all, Taylor came right out and said these talks had taken
place. More importantly, talking with a news subject about a possible job is
not always grounds for dismissal on Lehrer's show, which has not been so severe
with commentator David Gergen, who while still on the show talked to Bill
Clinton about coming to work for him before actually doing so.

            If you've just now finished your tax return, you'll be glad to know that
Congress is springing into action with a fundamental tax law change. The
Wall Street Journal reports that a bill already
passed by the House and awaiting Senate approval calls for taxpayers to start
writing checks to the Treasury instead of the IRS. "Backers hope," says the
Journal , "this change will send a clearer message to taxpayers [about]
where their money goes." Why not go all the way and let us start writing tax
checks to say, "Bob Dole's Condo Payments," "White House Lawyers' Salaries," or
"Linda Tripp's Tape and Battery Account"?

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Marcia Mellows

            
               USA
Today and the Washington Post lead with the grand jury appearance of
Monica's mom. But to the New York
Times and Los Angeles Times there's something much sexier than the
presidential love Jones--the Dow Jones. The NYT lead reports that
American households have more of their fortunes invested in the stock market
than at any time in the last 50 years, and maybe ever.

            
               USAT reports that Marcia Lewis (nee Lewinsky) is due back in the
grand jury room today after being compelled to answer questions yesterday about
her daughter's relationship with President Clinton. The paper reports that
according to some people in the know, Lewis was "aware of a relationship
between Lewinsky and the president." Also, that Lewis was aware her daughter
was "infatuated" with Clinton. Lewinsky is scheduled to appear before the same
grand jury later this week. And the dailies all quote her lawyer's comment that
she will testify if his attempts to quash the grand jury subpoena are
unsuccessful. "She has," says William Ginsburg, "no intention of falling on her
sword." Note to Ginsburg: ixnay on the sword metaphors.

            The WP adds that Lewis was privy to Lewinsky's taped account of her
relationship with Clinton, and that her reaction to her daughter's attempt to
conceal it from outsiders was, "What's the big deal? So she lied and convinced
someone else to lie." The paper effortlessly ticks off several of the scandal's
other new poontangents: a federal judge's denial of Clinton's request for a
speed-up of the Paula Jones case, another federal judge's allowing Kenneth
Starr to get his hands on a sealed deposition made by the allegedly
lipstick-smeared and disheveled Oval Office visitor Kathleen Willey, and the
turn-over to Starr of boxes of Jones case materials about yet other women
thought linked to Clinton.

            But the Post goes a bit overboard with 120-plus words on an alleged
conversation between Lewis and Lewinsky's former White House supervisor that
reveal nothing about the conversation except that it lasted less than five
minutes and was not confrontational. The NYT does a little better,
saying the discussion was Mom's inquiry into why Monica was transferred out of
the White House. The Post blind-sources this episode, while the
NYT credits it by name to Lewis' fianc,.

            None of the papers' accounts addresses a natural question: If spouses can't
be compelled to testify against each other, how come a mother (especially one
who's apparently her child's "closest confidante") can be compelled to testify
against a daughter? Why, in the law, is water thicker than blood?

            The Wall Street Journal recently caught a lot of hell for its
ultimately retracted story that a White House steward had told the Starr grand
jury the president had been alone with Ms. Lewinsky. Well, on today's WP
front, a retired Secret Service agent is saying the same thing.

            The possible Iraq attack takes a number and waits. Yes, it gets the off-lead
at USAT and a spot on the NYT front. However, at the WP , the
Secretary of Defense's various burnoose conferences slip to page 23. But
"Titanic"'s 14 Oscar nominations are front page at the Post and
LAT .

            The WSJ reports that, thus far, CBS' Winter Olympic ratings are about
17 percent below what was promised to advertisers, raising the prospect of
expensive givebacks to them.

            An FOTP sends along this AP dispatch from that ex-midshipwomen's murder
trial: "On Monday, jurors in the trial appeared bored or puzzled by the defense
team's tactic of presenting a number of witnesses." Hmmm.what were they
expecting?

            The NYT scrupulously corrects a prior misstatement of the words
making up the acronym of the James Bond nemesis organization "SPECTRE." Which
is particularly odd given the frequency with which Times readers are
left seriously confused about many of the paper's more significant alleged
redemptions and original sins. Here's a tip, though: "failure to attribute
phrasing" means "plagiarism."

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Pol Pot--Potted Pol?

            The Washington Post leads with a new study indicating that
false positive mammogram results are quite common. This is also the top
national story at the Los Angeles Times (and is featured on the USA Today
front and carried inside at the New York
Times ). USAT goes with word that the State Department has
declared twenty Russian agencies and research facilities ineligible for
millions in U.S. government aid because they may have provided missile
technology to Iran. The NYT lead is that Kofi Annan has decided to pull
U.N. human rights investigators out of Congo (formerly Zaire) because of the
new government's harassment and obstruction of their work.

            According to the study of the medical records of 2,400 women, the most
comprehensive of its kind ever attempted, 32 percent of all American women who
undergo annual breast checkups for a decade can expect to get at least one false mammogram indication of a tumor. That's if some
of the checkups are physical checks only--if all ten are mammograms, the odds
go up to 50 percent. (Hence USAT 's alarmist-seeming, but dead-accurate
headline: "False-positive rate for mammography 50-50.") The researchers
calculate that ultimately unnecessary follow-up tests add 33 percent to the
cost of breast cancer screening. Some doctors quoted in the Post say
that the threat of malpractice suits in the U.S. contributes to the problem, in
that it pressures radiologists to overdiagnose breast cancer.

            By the way, the study appears in today's issue of the New England Journal
of Medicine , a fact that the NYT leaves until the last sentence of
its AP version of the story. The WP waits until the 13th paragraph.
What's that all about? The LAT and USAT put the provenance
high.

            The USAT lead is based on a State Department list, obtained by the
paper, of banned Russian organizations, from universities to intelligence
agencies. Since it was issued, the paper says, U.S. officials have actually
denied funding to at least three Russian projects because their proposed
recipients were on the list. The move marks the first time specific Russian
institutions have been penalized for suspected missile aid to Iran.

            The WP reports that a cable-funded three-year study of television violence
billed as the largest ever concludes that "glamorized" violence--where physical
and mental consequences are not depicted, the kind considered most harmful to
viewers--remains rampant, despite Industry promises to address the problem. The
Post says the American Medical Association reacted by commenting that
"the study definitively confirms that TV portrays violence in a way that
increases the risk of learning aggressive attitudes."

            Both USAT and the LAT give front-page above-the-fold play to
the first major study of the Internet's economic impact,
released Wednesday by the Commerce Department. The information is stunning: Net
traffic is doubling every hundred days. E-commerce should reach $300 billion by
2002. The digital economy is growing at twice the rate of the overall economy
and now represents 8 percent of GDP. While it took radio 30 years to reach 50
million people, and TV took 13, the Internet did it in just four. (At this
rate, Slate might just break even while there are still papers for
"Today's Papers" to be about.) Both papers mention that Net technology has
served as a brake on inflation, but the LAT is clearer about why--the
paper relates that Hewlett-Packard has saved more than $200 million annually by
linking employees on an internal network and will shave 70 percent off its
paper costs via making personnel policies and payroll forms available online.
The Wall Street Journal notes another Net business
trend: Internet stockholder voting. Corporations that allow it include Bell and
Howell, Atlantic Richfield and Intel.

            The late metro edition of the NYT is able to state with some
confidence what the paper's earlier national edition was only able to treat as
a rumor: "Pol Pot is Dead, Thai Army Says." But not everybody is convinced--the
paper quotes a Western diplomat's reference to the recently announced U.S.
intention to bring Pot to international justice: "This is certainly a
convenient moment for him to have a heart attack."

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Revenue Game in Town

            The Washington Post, Los Angeles Times and New York
Times lead with the Senate's vote to overhaul the IRS. USA Today runs that
as its off-lead and goes instead with the FAA's order of urgent inspections and
repairs to 152 older-model Boeing 737s, a story that, of the other majors, only
the Wall Street Journal puts on the front page. (The NYT
national edition runs it on p. 14, freeing up front-page space to wonder
instead about what killed the artificial turf at Giants stadium.) The FAA move
was prompted by Continental Airlines' discovery in one plane of fuel leaking
into a wire-conduit going through a fuel tank, a situation, USAT
explains, not unlike that suspected of precipitating the TWA Flight 800
explosion.

            Apparently, not a single Senator believes the IRS ever deals with anyone
who's not an abused ex-wife or Howard Baker. The Senate voted 97-0 to put the IRS under a board of
directors and to create new limits on the agency's ability to impose penalties
on taxpayers. Like all feel-good legislation, this one will cost money--some
senators estimated that the extra obstacles to collection would cost about $18
billion over the next decade, say the papers. But the Senate discussion utterly
failed to put such figures in the larger context, which is that already
the "too-powerful" "abusive" IRS is missing out on at least $100 billion a year
in legally owed taxes and is already auditing less than one percent of
all returns. What's worse, the dailies don't mention this either.

            The NYT reports that in Half Moon Bay, California a
14-year-old eighth-grade boy has been the first student suspended from school
under a new state law that allows removal of students who threaten violence.
What makes the case unusual is that what precipitated this were the two papers
he turned in for an English class writing assignment: "The Riot," in which
students set fire to the school library, blow up the science labs, and beat the
principal, and "Goin' Postal," in which a boy shoots the school principal. The
boy and his parents are suing his school's principal and the school
district.

            The WSJ "Washington Wire" reports that the Army general who heads up
the 1st Cavalry Division had this assessment for acquisition officers of the
high-tech gear they're providing him: "You are fielding pieces of crap."

            A front-page LAT story and one inside at the NYT cover a
sociological finding coming out today in the journal Science . It's well
known that people will under-report their questionable behavior when asked
about it by an interviewer, but it has long been assumed that this problem was
addressed by conducting surveys via paper and pencil questionnaires. However,
by comparing paper-and-pencil surveys to those self-administered on a computer,
the new study shows that's not true. Which means that many accepted
paper-and-pencil surveys have rendered a distorted sense of how people behave.
The Science study, for instance, purports to show that among 1,600
15-19-year-old males, those computer-queried were almost 4 times more likely
than the paper-and-pencil group to report homosex, 5.5 times more likely to
admit they were often or always drunk or high when having sex with women, and
14 times more likely to cop to sex with an intravenous drug user.

            In the modern age, and especially in the modern newspaper, the pursuit of
money takes on the full aura that was, in a bygone time, reserved for the
pursuit of something else. Witness today's WSJ front-page account of the Daimler/Chrysler
merger. You have to wade pretty far down to get to "revenues," "earnings
per share," or "non-recurring income tax benefits." First you get the secret
hotel meetings, the furtive use of code names, the artful deflection of an
outsider's nosy question about the relationship. There's even, according to the
Journal , an important shower scene. And of course, there is, once the
liaison is on the verge of consummation, the age-old question of whose name to
take. "It was a very emotional issue at the end, emotional on both sides,"
Daimler's CEO is quoted saying. "We both felt strongly." But then they merged.
And it was good.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            The Senate Butts In

            
               USA
Today and the Washington Post lead with the new tobacco settlement bill
taking shape in the Senate. The New York Times
leads with the endorsement by House Republican leaders of new tax breaks to
help people who must buy their own health insurance. The Los Angeles
Times goes with the general split inside Republican ranks over whether
or not tax cuts should be part of this year's budget. The story notes that the
current proposed House budget includes tax cuts totaling $60 billion, compared
to the $350 billion worth of cuts called for in the Contract with America.

            
               USAT reports that the proposed tobacco bill would raise the price of
a pack of cigarettes by $1.10 and would cost cigarette companies more than half
a trillion dollars--a considerable increase over the $365 billion agreed to in
the proposed settlement reached last summer between the attorneys general of 40
states and the leading tobacco manufacturers. Like that settlement, the Senate
bill aims to reduce underage smoking, regulate nicotine as a drug and alter the
tone and reach of tobacco advertising. It also includes a payout to tobacco
farmers as compensation for lost income.

            The WP states, "Both the tobacco industry and public health advocates
assailed the bill from opposite directions: The industry called its price-tag
'unrealistic and onerous' while public health advocates said it was too weak on
the key issue of cutting underage smoking." Yet, USAT says, "tobacco
industry spokesmen declined public comment." Also, it's very odd to talk about
the reaction of the "industry" and "public health advocates" so broadly.
Neither are monoliths. So, why no for-attribution quotes in the Post
account here?

            The Post does explain one nuance USAT overlooks: whether that
$1.10 per pack surcharge specified in the bill will actually raise cigarette
prices enough to significantly reduce cigarette purchases. By the way, the
NYT states the Republicans plan to pay for their health insurance
initiative with revenue raised from higher cigarette taxes, with or without the
passage of a comprehensive tobacco settlement.

            The Wall Street Journal presents the "Award for Environmental
Lunacy" to the Michigan bureaucrat who sent a letter to a landowner last
December threatening him with "enforcement action" for "unauthorized" and
"hazardous" dam-building on his property. The landowner responded by pointing
out that the dams were built by...beavers.

            The Journal 's main "Politics and Policy" piece notes a
signal consequence of the absorption of the White House staff in the Clinton
sex scandals: the further empowerment of his Cabinet officers. Especially true,
says the paper, for Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin and his deputy, Lawrence
Summers, Budget Director Frank Raines, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright,
and Defense Secretary William Cohen.

            The WP runs a front-page piece noting that the NCAA is very worried about the fallout from the point-shaving
indictment last week of two former Northwestern basketball players. The
amount of money bet legally in Nevada on this year's basketball tournament,
says the Post , exceeds the amount bet there on the Super Bowl, and the
FBI says close to $2.5 billion is bet on it illegally. Gee, maybe, the
situation would improve if newspapers didn't print point-spreads.

            Meanwhile, the NYT front is concerned with another, er, sport. The
Times takes note of the latest developments in professional wrestling:
more sexual content, coarser language, and no more Good Guys. This apparently
produced an existential crisis on 43rd St.: "Now, there is no obvious moral
center: everything is basically bad and worse." Thank God, there's Brendan
Maguire, a professor of sociology at Western Illinois University specializing
in wrestling, for these troubled Times to quote.

            Over the weekend, "Titanic" director James "King of the World" Cameron began
exercising the perks of his new office by writing a piece in the LAT in
which he tried to fire the paper's lead film critic, author of two scathing
reviews of the iceberg epic. "Forget about Clinton," the director wrote, "How
do we impeach Kenneth Turan?"

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Softwar

            The two antitrust lawsuits filed against Microsoft by the Justice Department
and twenty states lead at the New York Times ,
Los
Angeles Times , and Washington Post . The suits are also flagged at the top of
the Wall Street Journal front-page news box. They are
the off-lead at USA Today (and also covered in that paper's front-page
"cover story"), which leads instead with the news that in working out the $200
billion highway bill, congressional negotiators dropped the provision that
would have set a tough national drunk-driving standard.

            The papers all have the same basic lawsuit details: The government and state
lawyers argue that after an abortive attempt at an "illegal conspiracy" deal
with browser rival Netscape, Microsoft violated antitrust laws by using its
virtual lock with Windows to dominate the Internet browser market. Although
Microsoft has already begun shipping Windows 98, the plaintiffs have asked a
judge to issue a quick preliminary injunction requiring the company to either
take its own browser out of that program or also include Netscape's browser.
And preventing Microsoft from enforcing contracts with online service providers
that would restrict the providers from also offering their customers
alternative browsers. (An area, says the NYT , that MS was apparently flexible about before
negotiations broke down over the weekend.) The state suit additionally asks for
Microsoft to be forced to change the way it sells its "Office" software to
computer manufacturers so that they would be freer to license competitors'
software.

            Bill Gates is quoted in the WP saying that these government demands
for inclusion of competitors is like "requiring Coca-Cola to include three cans of Pepsi in every
six-pack." The NYT lead editorial says the analogy is bad because Coke
isn't a monopoly.

            The government's papers include Microsoft internal e-mails and memos as well
as interviews and depositions of Microsoft executives, which, USAT says,
the government attorneys consider smoking-gun evidence. The WP cites for
instance a memo that says it would "be very hard to increase browser share on
the merits" of the company's product, and hence that the company should
"leverage Windows to make people use" it. But none of the dailies explain how
these internal documents came to be possessed by the government nor wonder
about the propriety of that. Also, although the WP and NYT list
the states suing, there is no explanation anywhere about what point there is
for the states to file their own suit, or why the other thirty states are
staying on the sidelines.

            Most of the coverage is steeped in the particulars of the memos, etc. The
LAT however, takes a somewhat broader view. It calls the
move against Microsoft, "one of the sharpest legal attacks on big business in
this century," and accompanies its lead with an interesting graphic depicting
the relative market shares enjoyed by American history's other celebrated
anti-trust targets, IBM, AT&T, and Standard Oil. IBM's is listed at 65
percent, but the other two are the same as Microsoft: 90 percent. The
LAT says that although fewer than half of Americans own a home personal
computer and fewer still surf the Internet, the suit could throw the computer
industry and the economy into turmoil.

            The LAT off-lead reports that three Mexican banks and 107 people were
indicted yesterday in Los Angeles by the U.S. on charges of laundering millions
for Latin American drug cartels. The story is also on the WP front,
while the NYT runs it inside.

            The WSJ and the WP report that Kodak is set to announce a deal with AOL designed help the
film manufacturer counteract inroads on its business being made by computerized
photography: You bring your film into a Kodak authorized developer and the
snaps are returned digitally to your AOL account. The program will be called
"You've Got Pictures."

            The NYT profile of San Francisco Examiner executive editor
Phil Bronstein quotes his wife Sharon Stone thusly: "He's
big enough for me...for my intense personality, my stature in the world."

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            These Guns Not For Hire

            The New York Times
leads with President Clinton's decision to impose a ban on the import of 58
types of assault-type weapons. This is also the top national story at the
Los
Angeles Times . The Washington Post 's top national story is a federally funded
study indicating that a drug previously used to prevent a recurrence of breast
cancer could dramatically prevent its onset as well. USA Today
leads with the Department of Transportation's decision to crack down on
airlines that use unfair methods to snuff out low-fare competitors.

            The news about the breast cancer drug, tamoxifen, comes, says
the WP , from the largest clinical experiment ever for testing a drug's
powers of cancer prevention. However, tamoxifen is also known, says the paper,
to treble the risk for uterine cancer, and to increase one's chance of
developing blood clots. (The headline over the story at USAT , which runs
it as its top-of-the-front-page "talker," emphasizes the "big risk.") It's
likely therefore, that the drug will only be recommended for women at high risk
for breast cancer.

            Clinton's gun move, says the NYT and LAT , could keep
more than one million high-powered guns out of the U.S. Assault weapons of this
sort have been banned previously, by the Bush administration (1989) and by an
earlier Clinton ban (1994), but foreign manufacturers responded by slightly
modifying their weapons. But now, explain the papers, the ATF has ruled that
these modifications are superficial and hence that the ban sticks. The
NYT says that the timing of the announcement was driven by Clinton's
desire to dramatize government action in the wake of the Arkansas schoolyard
shootings, even though none of the types of weapons used there are affected by
the decision. The NRA assailed the ban, and promised to seek relief in Congress
and the courts. The LAT says a White House official cites as one reason
for the move the paper's series last year about how weapons companies were
modifying their guns to make them legal but not less lethal. The WP
carries the story inside.

            The Wall Street Journal runs a "Rule of Law" feature detailing
the recent trend of the solidification of the rights of dogs, even vicious
ones. Courts in several states, for instance, have invalidated breed-specific
bans because they "deny pit bull lovers equal protection and due process."
Plus, Congress is considering "boneheaded" legislation that would force cities
to allow pit bulls in public housing.

            A piece in USAT 's "Money" section reports that federal officials are
concerned about the proliferation of companies on the Internet posing as banks.
In the past two years, the government has issued ten alerts about such
ventures, which could appear to be just like the more than 1,600 legit,
chartered banks with web sites.

            Inside the WP there's an AP story stating that according to the
Department of Justice's latest figures, alcohol is a factor in nearly 40
percent of all violent crimes. Victims of spousal abuse report that fully
three-fourths of their attacks were alcohol-related.

            In Sunday's column, Maureen Dowd pointed out that when Ken Starr was pressed
recently to justify the $30 million he's spent so far javerting Bill Clinton,
Starr replied that hey, he always flies coach on his investigatory jaunts to
Little Rock. In the adjacent op-ed, Robert C. Reich reported that first- and
business class seats now account for more than 22 percent of airlines' domestic
passenger revenue, up from just 9.5 percent in 1987. And according to Sunday's
LAT , a dozen California members of Congress routinely use government
funds for upgrades to first class or for first-class tickets. The LAT
dilutes the effect of this story by not mentioning any of the dirty dozen by
name until after the jump inside to page 22. The reader has to wait until the
tenth paragraph to learn that former Rep. Ronald Dellums routinely booked first
class seats for his trips, at a cost to taxpayers of six times the basic
government rate.

            A related story "Today's Papers" would love to see: How do the major
newspapers handle this issue? Does, for instance, renowned high-liver Johnny
Apple of the NYT fly first class when he's on a story and, if so, does
he pay the extra cost or does the Gray Lady go to the hip?

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Indonesian: Him Out

            Everybody's lead is the Suharto resignation. Immediately after Suharto
announced he was stepping down, Indonesia's vice-president, Jusuf Habibie, was
sworn in as his replacement. The army's commander pledged the loyalty of his
forces to the new leader.

            Yet, The Washington Post , Wall Street Journal , and Los Angeles
Times point out that Habibie has not been a favorite of the Indonesian
military. But only the WP explains why: He has never served in the armed
forces and while serving as the government's science and technology minister,
is known to have antagonized some of the top brass by forcing them to make
certain technical purchases.

            Reflecting a week in which 500 Indonesians were killed in street riots, in
his announcement Suharto is quoted as saying, "It has become extremely
difficult for me to continue the leadership of this country." Then he employed
the non-apology apology style so favored by discredited Western politicians,
expressing his "deepest sorrow if there were any mistakes, failures or
shortcomings." But he added something no Western politician says--at least not
until he's at his sentencing--he asked his countrymen to "forgive me." Only
USA
Today 's story and headline include this anomaly.

            The New York Times ,
WP , and LAT go front-page with yesterday's four nearly unanimous
House votes stating that President Clinton failed to act in the national
interest earlier this year when he permitted a U.S. company headed up by a
large DNC donor to sell satellite technology to China. Included in the votes
was a measure banning all further satellite exports to China, including current
and pending deals. The NYT and LAT headlines focus on the facts
of these restrictions--the WP headline instead goes more for the
political angle: "House Rebukes Clinton on China." The LAT mentions
quite clearly, and the WP somewhat obliquely, that then-President Bush
also presided over a waiver of satellite technology to China. The NYT
story does not. But the Times does add something incendiary to the China
pile: The DOJ blocked the release of a classified Pentagon report holding that
the satellite help China received under Clinton harmed U.S. national security,
by upgrading Chinese missile capabilities. The NYT 's lead editorial says
that Newt Gingrich's decision to investigate the export of sensitive technology
to China under the Clinton administration is "right beyond argument."

            The Post 's Howard Kurtz reports that the NYT staff is upset
over the metro section editor's recent remark that it would be unfair for
female journalists who take time off to have children to be as far along in
their careers as men, and that the LAT newsroom is up in arms over the
publisher's claim that women readers are more drawn to emotional stories than
men are, and his proposal of a system that would financially reward senior
editors who ensure stories include more quotations from minority group members
and women.

            The LAT op-ed page features a piece by Earl Ofari Hutchinson on the
recent trend of banning Kenyans in favor of American competitors
from long-distance races, in which Hutchinson wonders if California Gov. Pete
Wilson and other opponents of affirmative action will protest a policy that
rewards less-qualified white Americans. Well, whether or not they do, it seems
to "Today's Papers" that outrage such as Hutchinson's over the road race policy
tends to support outrage over affirmative action. Letting slower white American
runners into races just because they're white Americans is precisely analogous
to letting blacks and Latinos with poor SATs and low grades into colleges just
because they're blacks or Latinos.

            The catastrophic breakdown of the nation's paging system and the panic it
has inspired draws both news and feature coverage all around. But leave it to a
brilliant unnamed NYT editorialist to notice that panic was exactly the
wrong way to go. The wise course, he (or she) says, would have been to spend
yesterday at the ballpark. Yesterday, was, if we'd only noticed, "a snow day from outer space."

            Privacy enthusiast William Safire uses his column today to state his
positions on some recent eavesdroppings in the news. Linda Tripp's taping of
Monica Lewinsky was, he says, not okay, because the intern had a reasonable
expectation of privacy. But the prison tapes of Web Hubbell were okay because
he did not. Safire dismisses the exculpatory remarks by Hubbell concerning
Hillary's innocence, etc. as what FBI parlance calls "tickling the
wire"--producing self-serving statements because you know you are being
overheard. Surprisingly, Safire did not explain how this works by providing the
most famous example of the tactic: Nixon's knowingly taped Oval Office
statement that yes, he could raise money to silence the Watergate burglars,
"but it would be wrong."

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            High Wiring Act

            The New York Times
leads with the recommendation by the nation's air safety board that thousands
of airliners currently in service be rewired as a precaution against the sort
of fuel tank explosion that destroyed TWA Flight 800. The Washington Post goes with an exclusive about the status and
contents of Kenneth Starr's impending report to Congress. USA Today
leads with President Clinton's determination, expressed at a forum on Social
Security, to fix the system. This is also the top national story at the
Los
Angeles Times .

            The rewiring recommendation from the National Transportation Safety
Board, accompanied by the further suggestion that surge suppressors be put on
wires going into fuel tanks, shows, says the NYT , how far investigators
have come in their understanding of the TWA crash. But, explains the paper, the
board has an advisory role only, and implementation must be carried out by the
FAA, which often rebuffs the NTSB. The dramatic extent of the development is
pointed out by the NYT 's observation that Boeing alone has produced
nearly 10,000 airliners currently in service, and that the recommendation
applies to the planes of at least one other company, Airbus, as well.
USAT , the LAT , the WP and the Wall Street Journal mention in their accounts that an
immediate motive for the advisory was not just the wiring set-up of Flight 800,
but also the unsafe ones observed in three retired 747s.

            
               Post reporter Susan Schmidt obviously had help from someone in
Starr's office in putting together what amounts to a leaked status report on the fruits of his investigation.
She writes that much of the Starr report earmarked for the House of
Representatives (on the grounds that it describes potentially impeachable
offenses) has already been written, and that it pertains not only to President
Clinton's actions in the Lewinsky matter but also may include material about
whether Clinton was truthful in his sworn testimony for the 1996 bank fraud
trial of James and Susan McDougal. The Post also asserts that when the
Lewinsky case broke, Starr was on the verge of bringing new charges against
Clinton crony Webster Hubbell for receiving Whitewater hush money.

            Incidentally, notes the WSJ , although in his present role Starr has
fought hard against the administration's contention that executive privilege
shields some key Clinton advisors as well as Hillary, as a U.S. appeals court
judge, Starr "seldom rebuffed an assertion of privilege." Indeed, he wrote or
joined several opinions sending support to Clinton's position.

            President Clinton made a no-new-payroll-taxes comment at the first of four
scheduled regional town-hall style meetings on Social Security, in Kansas City.
However, reports USAT , aides later said he might support raising more
revenue for the program by increasing the limit on wages subject to the payroll
tax. But the NYT says Clinton would be "reluctant" to do that.
USAT says that one of the few concrete positions Clinton took at the
meeting was ruling out a conversion of Social Security to a private pension
system. But the NYT says Clinton is willing to consider private
individual accounts provided the overall plan they're a part of continues to
provide recipients with a guaranteed retirement benefit. The LAT , in its
front-page piece, agrees that Clinton sees the possibility of some
privatization.

            The WP has Clinton advisor Paul Begala's reaction to House Majority
Leader Dick Armey's comment that if he were facing the same sexual misconduct
charges as Clinton, he would resign: "If goofy ideas ever go up to $40 a
barrel, I'd like to have the drilling rights to Dick Armey's head."

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            America Discovers Columbus

            The Los
Angeles Times , Washington Post , and New York Times
all lead with the raucous reception the top Clinton foreign policy figures were
surprised to receive when they appeared at a town-hall-style discussion of Iraq
in Columbus, Ohio. USA Today , which runs Columbus as its off-lead, goes with
Ken Starr's questioning of President Clinton's key advisor, Bruce Lindsey.
USAT says Lindsey's five-hour grand jury appearance Wednesday included
testimony about past telephone conversations with Linda Tripp. The questioning
apparently set off a special conference with a judge about whether or not aides
like Lindsey are protected by executive privilege, although USAT says
that the White House has not invoked it.

            The in-studio Columbus audience of about 6,000 served up what the LAT
calls a "raucous, emotional debate that showed a nation far from convinced of
the administration's course in the Persian Gulf." Or as the WP puts it,
the Clinton team of William Cohen, Madeleine Albright, and Sandy Berger came
for a seminar, but "ran into a rumble." The Post reports that during
commercial breaks, while the startled Clintonites held whispered conferences,
aides fanned out into the noisy parts of the arena to calm those (numbering
about 200, guesses the Times ) chanting "We don't want your racist war."
Some of the most aggressive hecklers were carried outside.

            The Post serves up an acute description of what transpired: the
administration reps found themselves caught between opposing passions (about
being two tough on Iraq, about not being tough enough) armed only with a
largely passionless argument. The paper notes a simple example of the
predicament: Cohen waved about a photo of a mother and infant killed by Iraqi
chemical warfare while arguing against deposing or killing Hussein.

            The juxtaposition on the Post top-front is striking: "Top Aides
shouted down at 'Town Meeting' on Iraq" cheek-by-jowl with "The Guys are
Pumped," over a story about the stealth fighter crews massing in Kuwait.

            The pieces make it clear that the ordinary folks in the auditorium were
highly attuned to an issue that has gotten hardly any attention in the press:
consistency. In other words, why should we punish Hussein and support and
reward say, Indonesia, which has been slaughtering people in East Timor?

            But the coverage barely notices that the Columbus protest suggests something
squishy or downright wrong in all those polls showing extensive public support
for President Clinton's stance. (And probably puts the kibosh on that planned
town hall meeting on presidential dating.)

            The WP front reports that a rising number of women poor enough to be
on Medicaid would like to be sterilized, but because of their own paperwork
errors and stiff bureaucratic requirements, they aren't and keep having kids.
An additional factor is that the doctors who deliver these babies are scared of
being sued by women still in their child-bearing years. Also, Medicaid rules
prohibit the sterilization of a woman under 21 no matter how many children she
has.

            The WP notes a media consequence of l'affaire Lewinsky: a rebound for
conservatively oriented talk radio. This doesn't just mean, notes the
Post , better numbers for Rush and the G-man, but also things like Monica
look-alike contests and two stations offering million dollar prizes to any
woman who can prove she slept with the president.

            Both the Wall Street Journal and the NYT report that most of
the nation's law schools attacked the upcoming U.S. News and World
Report rankings (due out Friday). The schools hired a consultant to rebut
the listings and sent out a letter debunking them to 93,000 current law-school
applicants.

            Opponents of affirmative action often observe that it doesn't exist in
performance-based arenas like show business. But a small item in the WP 's TV column makes you wonder
even about that: It seems that UPN has ordered up a full season of episodes for
the virtually all-black "Moesha," which as of last Sunday, the paper reports,
ranked 124th among the 139 series on the air.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            B-2 Or Not B-2?

            Everybody leads with that case-against-Iraq speech President Clinton gave at
the Pentagon yesterday. Speaking to an auditorium full of military and civilian
Defense employees, and from a platform he shared with his Secretary of Defense
and his Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, Clinton justified possible airstrikes
with an implicit reference to the failures of appeasement in the period just
before World War II. "Force can never be the first answer," said Clinton. "But
sometimes, it's the only answer."

            In its piece on the speech, USA Today mentions that the Secretary-General of the
U.N., Kofi Annan, is going to Baghdad to try for a peaceful resolution. The
Washington Post makes it clear that if Annan's
mission fails to produce Iraqi compliance, an air bombardment is a "virtual
certainty." The administration's old line was, says the paper, "weeks not
months," but its new one is "days not weeks."

            Both the WP and the New York Times
note that Clinton has defined down his military objective--now we are after,
not totally ridding Iraq of mass destruction weapons, but seriously diminishing
their threat. However, Clinton did not, notes the Times , explain at what
point he would consider the Iraqi threat seriously diminished.

            The Times ' James Bennet obviously got to somebody present at the
military briefing Clinton attended just before speaking. His report reveals
that the briefing ran 45 minutes and centered on the details of a military
strike. Clinton mostly listened and made no new decisions. But he did ask about
the potential casualties in a strike, both among Iraqi civilians and American
pilots. He also asked about Iraq's ability to use chemical and biological
weapons in a confrontation.

            Both the WP and the NYT mention President Clinton's dismissal
of Saddam's desire to exempt certain "presidential" sites from weapons
inspection. One such site, Clinton explained, is 40,000 acres, whereas the
White House grounds take up but 18. The Times includes this quote of the president's: "We're not talking about a few rooms
here with delicate personal matters involved." In the age of Lewinsky, you
don't have to be Freud to find that an interesting choice of words for what
goes on in the White House.

            The Los
Angeles Times wisely puts at the top of its lead the simplest, most
forceful argument Clinton made, one that both USAT and WP omitted
and the NYT postponed until the last paragraphs of its story: His
"guarantee" that if Hussein isn't stopped now, he will someday use his
biochemical weapons.

            The USAT , WP , and LAT fronts all report President
Clinton's lawyers asked the judge in the Paula Jones case to dismiss her suit
for lack of substance. The WP runs the text of Clinton's legal motion in the matter, which includes an
argument that strikes the lay person as bizarrely permissive: Even on the
assumption that then-Gov. Clinton undertook the actions towards Paula Jones in
the Excelsior Hotel room that Jones alleges, that would not constitute "hostile
environment sexual harassment" because Jones went to the room voluntarily, the
episode only lasted at most 20 minutes, there was no violence or explicit
threats and she was able to leave when she decided to.

            The NYT front marshals the factors behind that ski lift disaster in
Italy two weeks ago: on his first flight in the area, the Marine Corps pilot
did not have maps showing the ski lift, was violating orders to fly 1,000 above
the ground and was off-course. All this beneath a headline that is simply
extraordinary in this age of lawyers restraining editors restraining reporters:
"HOW WAYWARD US PILOT KILLED 20 ON SKI LIFT."

            "I know it's not the most traditional way to balance the budget, but it just
might work." According to the Wall Street Journal "Tax Report," some 3,000 taxpayers
recently received notices from the IRS informing them that they each owed the
agency $300,000,000.

            At the Pentagon, real-world combat requirements come first--except when they
don't. A WP front-page piece reveals that even though the B2 stealth bomber is the most expensive aircraft ever built
($2 billion a copy), and could drop large numbers of "bunker buster" bombs on
Iraq without ever setting foot on skittish Arab runways, it's not likely to see
action over Iraq. The Pentagon corridor explanation teased out by the WP
is that if it were to fail it would be a colossal embarrassment for the Air
Force, while if it were to succeed it might siphon money away from newer hot
Air Force aircraft programs.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            As the World Interns

            The initial phase of the Clinton counter-thrust, which hit the beach on the
Sunday chat shows, leads everywhere. The main theme is not defend Clinton so
much as attack Starr. The TV appearances of James Carville and Paul Begala are
noted all around, as is the return to the White House of Harold Ickes, Mickey
Kantor, and Harry Thomasson (filming "A Place Called Hopeless?"). Everybody
also reports that negotiations between Ken Starr and Monica L.'s lawyer
continue.

            
               USA
Today reports that the strategy includes Clinton issuing a fresh denial
at 10 AM (ET) this morning at an event focusing on his child care proposals.
The Washington Post says this move was still up for
debate as it went to press.

            
               USAT and the Wall Street Journal state that ABC News reports that
Clinton and Lewinsky were seen "in an intimate encounter" in the White House in
1996. The front-page of the Los Angeles Times has this too, but with no mention
of ABC as the source.

            The WP lead reveals that Clinton has directed his pollsters to find
out how much the scandal has affected his standing with the public. The
New York Times
says an internal poll has already shown a drop of 15 percentage points.
Independent polls mentioned in the dailies also indicate slippage. The
Post paints a backstage picture in which anxious aides fear that the
president is not widely believed. And, the paper says, several administration
officials and Democrat operatives privately say they are worried that Clinton
may not be telling the truth. Some Democratic congressional staff members tell
the Post that Clinton's plan to omit all mention of the controversy from
the State of the Union speech is "totally surreal."

            The NYT lead is accompanied by a large picture of Bill and Hillary
coming out of church yesterday morning sharing a big ole laugh with the
minister. (They must have really enjoyed the sermon, "The Eight Commandments.")
The Times notes that in their public remarks Sunday, the pro-Clintonites
were careful not to attack Lewinsky. "We don't want to push her into Starr's
arms," is the explanation. The paper also states that Clinton loyalists are
"greatly distressed," and mentions that William Cohen recently looked unusually
depressed and shaken. Cohen is quoted as saying in a private meeting that if
the accusations are true, "it's all over."

            Another case of staff distress is reported by the WSJ , which recounts
how, at a public forum in D.C., Clinton health-care adviser Chris Jennings
broke down in tears in the middle of a speech.

            The Journal editorial "Bonfire of the Presidency" counters the suggestion coming
from some quarters that Monica L. has an overactive imagination with the
question, "Did a delusional 24-year-old make up the point about perjury not
often being prosecuted in civil cases?" The Journal finds all the
psychopathology in the case elsewhere: ".[T]he roots of this crisis lie
somewhere in the psyche shaped by Mr. Clinton's genes, troubled childhood and
life experiences."

            The story of the Pope's departure from Cuba after a five-day stay makes everybody's
front. A big part of the stories is his condemnation of the U.S. embargo of the
island. But the pontiff also criticized Cuban atheism and called for the
protection of all Cubans' rights.

            The NYT reports that a new study from the CDC shows a continuing, and in some ways,
growing disparity between the health of blacks and whites. Some examples: The
number of diabetes cases rose 33 percent among blacks, three times the increase
among whites. Ditto for infectious diseases. And from 1987 to 1995, the death
rate for black mothers in childbirth jumped 48 percent, compared with an
overall rate of 7.6 percent. And blacks still have two times the infant
mortality rare of whites.

            In light of the decision by Sonny Bono's widow to run for his congressional
seat, the LAT front page reports that among first-time House candidates
from 1916 to 1993, 84 percent of the widows won, while only 14 percent of the
other women did.

            The NYT runs an op-ed by writer Janna
Malamud Smith that states "If we're going to make simplistic rules about
truth-telling, mine would start here: Ms. Tripp should have told Ms. Lewinsky
why she invited her to lunch.. " Elsewhere on the page, Anthony
Lewis makes a point in passing that's been overlooked thus far: Ken Starr
first got Ms. Tripp to wear a wire and then used its fruits to get permission
to widen his investigation. Shouldn't the permission to widen have
preceded the wire, which was in fact the widening?

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Headline

            USAT and the WP lead with the heating-up Paula Jones case. The NYT national
edition goes with the maneuvering between Castro and the Catholic Church on the
eve of the Pope's visit to Cuba. The LAT leads with the likely stance President
Clinton will take in separate White House meetings this week with Netanyahu and
Arafat--gentle persuasion, not tough talk.

            The USAT lead states that leaks indicate that in his deposition last
Saturday, Clinton was asked detailed questions about his sexual history with at
least four women, including one woman escorted by a state trooper to a
rendezvous just days before he became president. The paper says Clinton denied
sexually harassing Jones or anyone else.

            The WP lead has the same thrust, only a little more detailed. For
instance, the Post also has the story about the woman meeting with
Clinton just days before his first Inaugural, but adds the detail that she says
all the encounters were innocent. And the Post emphasizes that how much
of the collateral sexual material gets into the actual trial is up to the trial
judge. The paper clearly has a Jones Jones, also reporting that she emerged
from Saturday's deposition "clearly elated," dining out, drinking champagne and
laughing, and putting a second Paula piece on the front, about how the public
is taking the whole thing. By contrast, neither the NYT nor the
LAT get to it until the inside.

            The NYT lead observes that despite Castro's talk portraying the Pope
as an ally in the struggle against American imperialism, there's still plenty
of religious repression in Cuba, The Times ' Larry Rohter gives an
eyewitness account of Havana cops ordering kids from a church group to stop
putting up posters advertising the pontiff's visit.

            The LAT has, on Martin Luther King day, two front-page civil
rights-related stories. (The NYT has a big picture on the front of a
black church choir, but puts its King story, about how Memphis handles his
memory, inside.) One is that Al Gore will announce today, at King's church in
Atlanta, a 17 percent DOJ budget increase that if approved by Congress would
mean a stepped-up anti-discrimination emphasis in such areas as fair-housing
laws and police misconduct investigations. The other is the bizarre news that
last week, the family of one of the young girls murdered in that 1963
Birmingham church bombing discovered that her grave is empty.

            Iraq has largely slipped off the front page, but the USAT off-lead describes
how both sides are talking tougher now. Sen. John McCain, reports the paper,
called on TV over the weekend for "sustained air operations" if the crisis
isn't resolved, while the Iraqi VP urged 1 million Iraqis to join a new
military force to stage a holy war against the U.N. sanctions. (Suggested
slogan: "We do more surrendering before 9 o'clock than most soldiers do all
day.")

            The NYT observes that last year, there were $1 trillion worth of
mergers involving U.S. companies, 50 percent more than 1996, which was itself a
record year. The paper likens these mega-mergers to the industrial upheavals at
the beginning of the twentieth century, when more than a dozen auto companies
became General Motors and dozens of steel companies were forged by J.P. Morgan
into U.S. Steel.

            Inside, the Times reports that a former American ambassador to
Britain has, in a new book excerpted in the Sunday Telegraph , charged
that the U.S. ambassador to Ireland, Jean Kennedy Smith, is such an "ardent IRA
apologist" that the British began withholding sensitive security information
from the Clinton White House.

            According to the WP , China's main English language paper announced
that Chinese military factories had $7 billion in export sales last year. The
"official," less-than-full-disclosure flavor of the story comes with the detail
that the these sales are supposed to be 80 percent civilian goods such as
airplane fuselages, televisions and hairnets, but there isn't one current
example cited from that other 20 percent.

            The WP business section runs an interview with AOL's Steve Case,
which reveals that the company now handles 80 million e-mails a day, and that
up until a few years ago, Case wasn't able to get his parents to understand
what he did for a living. USAT and the WP lead with the heating-up Paula Jones
case. The NYT national edition goes with the maneuvering between Castro and the
Catholic Church on the eve of the Pope's visit to Cuba. The LAT leads with the
likely stance President Clinton will take in separate White House meetings this
week with Netanyahu and Arafat--gentle persuasion, not tough talk.

            The USAT lead states that leaks indicate that in his deposition last
Saturday, Clinton was asked detailed questions about his sexual history with at
least four women, including one woman escorted by a state trooper to a
rendezvous just days before he became president. The paper says Clinton denied
sexually harassing Jones or anyone else.

            The WP lead has the same thrust, only a little more detailed. For
instance, the Post also has the story about the woman meeting with
Clinton just days before his first Inaugural, but adds the detail that she says
all the encounters were innocent. And the Post emphasizes that how much
of the collateral sexual material gets into the actual trial is up to the trial
judge. The paper clearly has a Jones Jones, also reporting that she emerged
from Saturday's deposition "clearly elated," dining out, drinking champagne and
laughing, and putting a second Paula piece on the front, about how the public
is taking the whole thing. By contrast, neither the NYT nor the
LAT get to it until the inside.

            The NYT lead observes that despite Castro's talk portraying the Pope
as an ally in the struggle against American imperialism, there's still plenty
of religious repression in Cuba, The Times ' Larry Rohter gives an
eyewitness account of Havana cops orderi

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Pre-NATO Care

            The Los
Angeles Times , USA Today , and the Washington Post lead with the Senate passage and the likely
presidential veto of a bill saddling the Clinton goal of paying up UN dues with
a GOP anti-abortion provision. The New York Times
goes with the Senate's defeat of a proposal for limiting the cost to the U.S.
of expanding NATO.

            The UN dues bill includes a rider barring U.S. aid to international family
planning groups that perform or support abortions, which, says the LAT ,
"almost certainly dooms" the payback effort. The LAT and WP note that both Trent Lott and Jesse Helms say a
veto means there will be no further action on this. USAT and the
WP remind readers that House Republicans attached a similar poison pill
provision to the last attempt at a UN pay-up, which was vetoed by President
Clinton.

            The coverage plays into Washington's unfortunate preference for politics
over substance: there isn't a word about those international family planning
organizations (none are even identified) and to what extent they facilitate
abortions.

            The NYT reports that the Senate discussion concerning NATO continues to be lively, and that
the cost cap was the first of perhaps two dozen NATO expansion amendments the
Senate will consider before it's through. Yesterday's debate focused mainly on
whether or not the proposed new members--Poland, Hungary, and the Czech
Republic--can afford to field the level of armed forces NATO requires. The
Times notes that expansion cost issues seem paramount to the Senate.
This means many members don't really trust the official estimates, because
officially, expansion will cost but $40 million a year over the next
decade--less than half a new fighter plane a year.

            And the Times explains that some senators are concerned that more and
more new members will be coming in, hurting NATO's strength. It occurs to
"Today's Papers" though, that here may lie the true solution: Let any country
join NATO. If members are required to promise not to attack each other, as the
number of non-member countries declines, the alliance's military needs would
diminish and hence so would its expenses.

            Economic factoids: the LAT and USAT fronts report that the
booming economy has delayed the insolvency of Social Security for three
additional years--until 2032. The WP runs this on the inside, but
reports on its front that the Y2K problem will cost U.S. companies $50 billion
and worldwide, the cost to business will be $300 billion.

            Just days ago, the new warm and fuzzy Newt Gingrich was on tour with a book
mostly about diet and exercise. Well, judging from the WP second lead,
book sales must have slipped and Newt is back on red meat. The paper quotes
Gingrich's assessment of the Clinton administration as
engaged in "the most systematic, deliberate obstruction of justice cover-up and
effort to avoid the truth we have ever seen in American history, and the time
has come to say to the president, 'Quit undermining the law in the United
States. Turn over the evidence.'"

            Last fall, an LAT front-page spread made IRS abuses a big story. The
paper stays on the case with a front-page account of a Senate hearing Tuesday
that disclosed corruption among IRS officials: one was thought to have stolen
as many as twenty confiscated luxury vehicles and another wrote an anonymous
threatening letter to a tax attorney who had testified against the agency at
congressional hearings. The WP runs the tax hearings inside. The
Wall Street Journal "Tax Report" reports that Jack
Regan Stevens, a former IRS officer, pleaded guilty to embezzling 13 taxpayer
payments totaling more than $77,000 by altering payment checks made out to
"IRS" so that they resembled his initials. The column also includes a modest
proposal for ushering in a simplified tax code: require all members of Congress
and the president to prepare their own returns without professional help.

            Why is demi-billionaire California gubernatorial candidate Al Checchi a
Democrat? Because, he is quoted on the LAT op-ed page, "It's easier to
teach economics to Democrats than compassion to Republicans."

            "Today's Papers" is more than a little mystified by the sudden journalistic
interest in the reality of the Jerry Springer show. Pretty soon, the papers
will be breathlessly revealing that talk-show couch conversations are scripted
and that Sam Donaldson employs fake hair and real researchers. Still, the idea
in a letter to today's Times from a Yale med school prof
is a good one: just put a cop on the Springer set. Real fights would meet with
arrests and fake ones wouldn't and hence would be quickly unmasked. Either way,
says the doc, the audience would evaporate.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Bad Tripp

            The State of the Union speech is everybody's lead. President Clinton's
desire to use any budget surpluses to "Save Social Security First" generally
leads the lists of the speech's proposals, which included calls to raise the
minimum wage, expand Medicare and child-care subsidies, as well as $7 billion
to recruit 100,000 new teachers, a "patient bill of rights" for managed-care
clients, and funding for the IMF. Clinton also used the occasion to warn
( USA
Today says "threaten") Saddam Hussein that the U.S. is determined to
deny him the ability to use weapons of mass destruction again.

            The Washington Post calls the SOTU an "activist agenda" that is
the "most expensive and comprehensive" that Clinton has put forward since the
Republicans captured control of Congress in 1994. The New York Times
observes that this sweeping program comes two years after Clinton declared the
end of the era of big government, but goes on to note Clinton's alternative
description: "We have a smaller government, but a stronger nation." The
Wall Street Journal SOTU piece provides a useful
clarification here: "While federal spending has declined as a share of the
total economy, the drop has come mostly in defense spending. Meanwhile, social
spending has grown relative to the gross domestic product, particularly for the
entitlement programs....."

            Noting the scandal context, the Los Angeles
Times calls last night "awkward and electrifying," while the NYT
declares, "Few other politicians of his generation--or any other--could have
pulled off a performance like that of Clinton on Tuesday night." (The paper
also passes along word that earlier in the day Clinton was nominated for the
Nobel Peace Prize. Hmmmm..that might be what it takes.)

            The NYT runs a separate front-page piece about the Iraq situation that notes the increasing tempo of
American-British strike planning. The piece also reports that the U.S. hopes to
get support from Saudia Arabia for any action against Iraq, in the form of
permission to use the country's air bases.

            There's a lot of front-page coverage of Hillary Clinton's remarks yesterday
on the "Today" show, in which she described Kenneth Starr as a "politically
motivated prosecutor" who is part of "a vast right-wing conspiracy." Several
dailies report that Starr dismissed her comments as "nonsense." And USAT
states that Sen. Lauch Faircloth, a Starr ally, responded by calling Mrs.
Clinton a ""frustrated woman.lashing out without foundation."

            The LAT runs a front-page piece reporting on the appearance yesterday before Starr's grand jury by Clinton's
personal secretary, Betty Currie. Prosecutors are interested in a series of
visits--approved by Currie--Monica L. made to the White House when the former
intern no longer worked there. They are also, says the paper, trying to
determine whether Currie tried to make contact with Lewinsky from the White
House on the day Lewinsky was first interrogated by Starr's FBI agents.

            The WP reports that Monica's lawyers and Ken Starr are moving closer
to some sort of deal under which she would testify about whether she had a
sexual relationship with the president as well as--and this would be a big chip
for Starr--whether Clinton urged her to deny this Date of the Union. The
Post also says that more than a year prior to secretly taping Monica
Lewinsky, Linda Tripp tried to sell a book about the Clinton White House,
asking the conservative publisher Alfred Regnery for something in the
neighborhood of $500,000. Her agent? Lucianne Goldberg. The working title of
the four-page proposal was, "Behind Closed Doors: What I Saw Inside the Clinton
White House." One chapter was titled, "The President's Women."

            Looking for a college campus that actually doesn't have enough
political correctness? Check out the University of Florida. There, reports the
WP , the university's white president, John Lombardi got to keep his job
after he described his boss, Chancellor Adam Herbert, who is black, as an
"Oreo." Legislators and powerful alumni came to Lombardi's defense.

            Media predictions: At one time feared to be old hat, "Primary Colors" should
now do big box office. And the
round-the-clock-more-lawyers-turned-commentators-than-
is-compatible-with-healthy-digestion coverage of the upcoming Paula Jones trial
should reach O.J. proportions.

            If you thought that Dick Morris, now back in Bill Clinton's "crisis
cabinet," was going to make things smoother at the White House, you don't know
Dick. Maureen Dowd quotes the recovering toe sucker's explanation for why the
president might have a wandering eye: ".Let's assume, O.K., that his sexual
relationship with Hillary is not all it's supposed to be, let's assume that
some of the allegations that Hillary--sometimes not necessarily being into
regular sex with men--might be true."

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Criminal Types!

            
               USA
Today , the Washington Post , and the New York Times
each lead with a federal judge's rejection of Monica Lewinsky's claim that she
had an immunity deal with Ken Starr. The Los Angeles
Times leads with the results of the first U.S. study of the French
abortion pill RU-486: highly effective and safe for terminating early
pregnancies, a story that doesn't make the other front pages (the NYT
national edition carries it on p. 20).

            Lewinsky's lawyers had been arguing that a letter from Starr granted her
immunity. The judge's dismissal of that contention, writes USAT , may set
the stage for Starr to force Lewinsky to "appear" before a federal grand jury.
This is a little confusing since actually, Starr would have had more leverage
to force Lewinsky to testify (rather than just show up) if she had
immunity from prosecution. (The WP and NYT get this point right.)
But in any case, one of Lewinsky's lawyers, William Ginsburg, is quoted by
USAT as saying his client "will never testify before a grand jury
without immunity." And the Post reports that her other lawyer, Nathaniel
Speights, "ridiculed" the idea that Starr would indict his client. "No one," he
is quoted as saying, "is going to stand for somebody being indicted for having
a sexual relationship with the president." (Today's reports in the NYT
and WP to the effect that Hillary Clinton used the marital
confidentiality privilege to avoid answering some Starr questions means that
she may be somebody who is not being indicted because she's having a
sexual relationship with the president.)

            The judge's ruling is still under seal. USAT credits the story to an
unnamed "person with knowledge of the decision." The Post cites
"individuals familiar with the case." The LAT refers to "sources close
to either side of the investigation." Wonder why the NYT semi-outed its
own sources, saying they are "lawyers," which leaves them quite vulnerable to
punishment by the judge, who warned the lawyers in the case against disclosing
her sealed rulings.

            The LAT front and the insides of the Wall Street Journal and the WP report that a
consortium of Blue Cross health plans in 38 states (why does the WSJ in
its story use the odd locution "more than 35 states"?) filed lawsuits against
the tobacco industry, seeking billions in damages to compensate for the expense
of treating smoking-related illnesses. The lawsuits, modeled on those
successfully brought by several state governments in recent years, constitute,
in the words of the LAT , a "major new assault" in what is already
history's costliest collection of cases. A similar ratcheting up is afoot in
the Microsoft wars, with, the NYT front reports, thirteen states
planning a joint antitrust action, separate from the pending federal case
against the company, to block the release of Windows 98.

            The NYT has a front-page exclusive detailing a first in the annals of
crime: a cyber murder confession. On March 22, a man screen-named "Larry"
made a posting to an on-line alcoholics support group in which he described how
three years ago he murdered his five-year-old daughter. The on-line chat that
followed included postings comforting the man by telling him that the crime was
long past, but three of the people participating went to authorities, and a few
days later, in a phone call to police in North Dakota, where the crime
occurred, Larry Froistad confessed again.

            As William Safire did earlier in the week, the NYT lead editorial has
harsh words for the Justice Department's investigation into the 1996 Clinton
re-election effort's possible illegal use of campaign funds. The editorial,
titled "Janet Reno's Latest Trick," says the departure of the lead prosecutor
after only seven months makes it "plain that his appointment was a
public-relations masquerade." Reno had to approve his transfer to a U.S.
Attorney's job in San Diego and so has, says the paper, once again
"snookered...citizens who wanted a full investigation of the most corrupt
campaign fund-raising operation since Watergate."

            The WP 's T.R. Reid tells of the latest O.J. outrages. It seems that when a BBC reporter
knocked on his door recently, he came out pretending to stab her several times
with a banana. In the subsequent interview with her, Simpson said that gorgeous
women are constantly throwing themselves at him. When Simpson spotted an L.A.
District Attorney on the street while riding around in a BBC van, he responded
the same way any other innocent citizen would: he leaned out of the window and
shouted "an anatomical obscenity" at her. (By the way, why the code phrase? If
the Post can--unlike the NYT --let its readers know when a
congressman thinks the president is a "scumbag," then surely it can come dirty
on this little bit of verbiage.)

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Willey or Willie?

            
               USA
Today and the Washington Post lead with Kathleen Willey's "60 Minutes"
interview. The other papers pretend there was something else on. The Los Angeles
Times says the day's top story is the government of Iran's crackdown on
oil shipments to Iraq that violate U.N. sanctions. The New York Times ,
even more transparent in its attempt to appear above pack journalism, goes
with--are you sitting down?--the possibility that Republicans could take over
all the governors' slots of the old Confederacy. This is particularly odd in
that the NYT 's own front-page Willey story states that "even the
president's supporters say that if proved true, the accusations of perjury and
obstruction of justice in the Lewinsky matter could end Clinton's
presidency."

            In her interview, Willey gave a paw-by-paw description of her encounter with
President Clinton in a small study off the Oval Office and charged that Clinton
lied about it. All the papers have Willey's comment that she considered
slapping him but decided not to because "I don't think you can slap the
president of the United States.." And everybody has Clinton lawyer Robert
Bennett's comment that his client is "absolutely bewildered" by Willey's
allegations, and that there is as yet unreleased information that will undercut
them.

            
               USAT reports that "Willey also said during the 60 Minutes interview
that she told Linda Tripp about her encounter in the Oval Office. Willey said
Tripp, whose tape recording of conversations with Lewinsky sparked Starr's
investigation, later told her, 'I'm going to get you, and . . . everyone else
in this place before this is all over.'" (Tripp's lawyers deny that she ever
made such a statement.) This passage leaves the reader wondering why Tripp's
response to Willey's report of her Oval Office incident would be anger towards
Willey. But what's really going on is that the paper has garbled the "60
Minutes" interview. In it, Willey says that Tripp was angry at her, not about
the alleged grope, but because Willey got a White House job--which Tripp
attributed to Clinton's interest in Willey while Tripp lost hers,.

            In its lead, the WP gets this right. The Post also points out
that in some ways, Willey could be a more troublesome witness for Clinton than
the other women alleging sexual harassment, because Willey was originally
unwilling to tell her story, her accusation is of a non-consensual act, and she
is hardly a Clinton-hating member of the vast right-wing conspiracy Hillary
Clinton cited, having worked to get Clinton elected.

            
               USAT quotes the president of NOW, Patricia Ireland, as saying, "It's
not just sexual harassment. If it's true, it's sexual assault." The WP
has this too, but in addition notes the significance of the remark: it's a
break with the generally complacent attitude most feminists have maintained
toward the Clinton sex scandals. (Up till now their motto has been: "The devil
you know is better than...Trent Lott.") Also, USAT decides to leave out
the rest of the Ireland quote, which the WP includes: "He put his hand
on her breast; he put her hand on his erection. That is a pretty serious charge
if true and it is a very big problem." The NYT , in its front page story
also makes the point about the significance of Ireland's remark, but cuts her
quote just where USAT does. The LAT goes the other way a little
bit, saying that Willey claims Clinton "fondled" her breasts and placed her
hand on his "crotch," even though Willey didn't use either of the words in
quotes.

            In a wise departure from standard newspaper practice, the Post
doesn't clean up Willey's quotes, so that its report communicates a good deal
of the emotion of the televised interview: "And then he, then he, then he
kissed me on, on my mouth and, and pulled me closer to him. And I remember
thinking, I just remember thinking, 'What in the world is he doing?' ... And I,
I pushed back away from him and--he, he, he, he, he's a big man. And he, he had
his arms, they were tight around me and he, he touched me....He touched my
breasts with his hand and I, I, I, I was, I, I was just startled."

            There is a dangling thread from the interview that none of the papers tugs
at: Willey says that one of the first people she saw after she got away from
the president was then-Secretary of the Treasury Lloyd Bentsen. Why doesn't
some enterprising reporter go ask Bentsen what his impression of Willey's
demeanor was?

            The LAT 's Willey story says that in Clinton's Jones case deposition,
he "acknowledged embracing Willey and perhaps kissing her on the forehead. He
said he has engaged in similar displays of affection with 'scores and scores of
men and women who have worked for me or been my friends over the years.'" Maybe
it's time some of those men Bill Clinton has kissed on the forehead came
forward to support their president.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Oregon Crazy

            A fifteen-year-old's shooting spree at his Oregon high school leads USA Today . A
record deal--the planned purchase of PolyGram by Seagram Co.--leads at the
Los
Angeles Times . The New York Times
national edition lead is the new president of Indonesia's first day in office.
Under a banner headline, the Washington Post goes with long-time Mayor Marion Barry's
decision not to run for re-election, but its top national story is Oregon.

            The details of the Oregon shootings are, in the words of the WP ,
"disturbingly familiar": a kid well-known for trouble acts out prior threats
via his access to tremendous firepower. According to the dailies, the boy,
Kipland Kinkel, shot up the school cafeteria with a rifle and two pistols,
killing one student and wounding twenty-six. The carnage was stopped when a
critically wounded student tackled Kinkel. USAT , WP and
LAT report that two bodies, believed to be that of Kinkel's parents,
were later found in his house. The NYT reached the boy's grandmother,
who said that he "murdered his mother and father."

            Afterwards, some parents charged that the school had ample warning that
Kinkel posed a danger to others. The day before yesterday, he had been
suspended from school and arrested for bringing a gun to school, and he was
released to his parents. And he had, the papers say, frequently written and
talked about killing in school assignments. USAT reports that he had
been voted by classmates "most likely to start World War III.''

            Both the NYT and WP quote an expert's observation that the recent
trend of school shootings has accelerated from single specific victims to
indiscriminate multiple homicides.

            The LAT is the only paper putting merger over murder today. Its account of
Seagram/Polygram seems a bit breathless. The deal, says the paper's lead
paragraph, involves the likes of Hanson, LL Cool J, Van Morrison, and Luciano
Pavarotti. And it would "radically alter the nature of the architecture of the
business by shrinking the number of global competitors from"--can you stand
it?--"six to five."

            Deep inside the WP is a report that casts an interesting light on the
recent U.N. inspection wrangle with Iraq. The paper's Nora Boustany states that
contrary to the general media coverage, back in February when inspectors were
barred from one of Saddam Hussein's presidential palaces, they weren't looking
for actual weapons or other hardware--they were looking for documents
about such things. Which would explain how the Iraqis were able to render the
sites pristine in the relatively short time before the inspectors finally
gained access.

            
               USAT achieves a Post-Monica rarity: a half-hour of face-time with
President Clinton. The president tells the paper he "absolutely" will travel as
planned to China despite GOP criticisms that U.S. policy has been unduly
influenced by Chinese campaign contributions. Clinton describes his
administration's decision to allow high technology to be exported to China as
"routine." He also tells USAT that during his trip, he will raise the
issue of illegal campaign contributions with China's leaders. (That's what
we're afraid of.)

            The Wall Street Journal 's "Washington Wire" reports that some
twenty lawmakers who voted this week to restrict satellite exports to China had
previously urged Clinton to export satellites there.

            Ever wonder if congressional staffers help their bosses write their
newspaper submissions? Consider the following from the WP . "It is vital
that as the global economy goes into high gear, there is a globally consistent
standard for intellectual property. [Copyright] Term extension represents one
aspect of the harmonization of the intellectual property regimes." Signed, Rep.
Mary Bono.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Petroleum Jelling

            The Washington Post and New York Times
lead with the decision by a coalition of some of the world's top oil exporters
to cut back production in an attempt to reverse a sharp price slide. USA Today ,
which runs the oil story as its off-lead, leads with the revelation that last
fall, the State Department shut down some of its worldwide computer systems
because of a suspected penetration by hackers. The systems contain unclassified
but sensitive information such as the travel schedules of U.S. embassy
officials. The Los Angeles Times goes with the first joint appearance of
the leading Democratic gubernatorial candidates at a state party
convention.

            The oil news is that Saudi Arabia, Venezuela, and Mexico, which together
supply about a fifth of the world's oil, issued a joint statement saying that
they and other oil producers plan a cutback amounting to about 2.7 percent of
world production. The move, which the WP calls "unusual solidarity," is
expected to send oil prices up. The NYT reports that the initial
reaction in the Asian markets on Monday was nearly a $4 up-tick.

            The Times explains that having non-OPEC countries like Mexico on
board is important because in the past OPEC production cuts have often been met
with non-OPEC production surges. The paper also notes that many analysts had
been predicting the economic pain of low oil revenues would force the producers
to rein in production. Clear enough, but then the paper goes on to "illustrate"
that idea with the following passage from the joint statement, which is
anything but: ".[A] drop in oil prices could lead to a reduction in the
investments needed to secure international supplies, which would destabilize
the world economy in the medium term."

            OSCAR NOTE I: The LAT says that "The Full Monty," made for a paltry
$3.5 million, could ultimately turn a profit of around $100 million. The
Wall Street Journal says the movie has already raked
in more than $200 million.

            OSCAR NOTE II: This past Saturday's NYT reported that acting is on
the rise as an occupational choice for young people, and today's USAT
"Snapshot" reports that in a recent poll, 51 percent of men surveyed would
prefer their children grew up to be a Hollywood star rather than a U.S.
Senator. (Only 32 percent of the women preferred this.)

            Curiously, the LAT lead puts in the second paragraph the information
that businessman Al Checchi criticized Rep. Jane Harman for appealing to
Republicans, that Harman sniped at Checchi for having a lot of position papers,
and that Lt. Gov. Gray Davis attacked them both as millionaires trying to buy
the election, but delays until the fifth paragraph the news that Checchi and
Harman said that as governor they would seek to repeal Prop. 209, the
California ballot measure outlawing racial and gender preferences in state
hiring and college admissions, and that Davis would not do this. Plus, the
reader has to wait to the sixth paragraph to learn that Davis also wouldn't
commit to signing a bill sanctioning gay marriage, while both Checchi and
Harman would do that.

            The WP runs a piece inside reporting that according to Russian
sources, Russian intelligence agents have, for the past several years, quietly
recruited scientists to go to Iran and teach their Iranian counterparts how to
build missiles to carry deadly payloads as far as 1,200 miles. The piece goes
on to say that the Russians intend to stop this practice. Some observers,
remarks the Post , wonder if the Russian government can in fact stop the
flow of scientists to Tehran.

            The WSJ brings evidence that not every conservative blindly supports
the many turns of Ken Starr's investigation of President Clinton. The "Rule of
Law" piece, by a former Reagan administration deputy attorney general, argues
that "it is time for a sober reassessment of the power we have concentrated in
the hands of prosecutors and the alarming absence of effective checks and
balances to prevent the widespread abuse of that power."

            The two people in America who still think of the NYT as America's
sober "paper of record," are directed to Sunday's front section, page 20.
There, instead of the dozens of straightforward shots of Robert Bennett no
doubt available, the paper opts for a shot of him with a crazed smile and hands
not quite in front his face, making him look like a spastic Mafia don.

            The WP reports on last Saturday night's Gridiron Dinner, that annual
Washington D.C. court masque in which bigfoot journalists entertain the
government's heaviest hitters and vice-versa. The centerpiece this year was
President Clinton's monologue, which featured the following joke he said had
been approved by his lawyers: "Knock-knock" "Don't answer that."

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Goldwater: A View From A Broad

            
               USA
Today and the Los Angeles Times lead with President Clinton's decision to
accept a federal judge's ruling that executive privilege does not protect his
aide Sidney Blumenthal from being questioned by Kenneth Starr. Clinton will
however, the papers report, still pursue an effort in the courts to invoke
attorney-client privilege to block Starr's effort to question another aide,
deputy White House counsel Bruce Lindsey. (This story is also the off-lead at
the New York Times
and the Washington Post .) The NYT goes with the South Korean
president's call for the West--including the U.S.--to drop its sanctions
against North Korea, and the WP leads with the news that Mexican drug
cartels are, via a new far more potent strain of heroin, gaining a growing
share of the U.S. drug trade.

            The LAT says that Clinton's legal shift has the benefit of allowing
him to fight on, but on much less controversial grounds, and yet still perhaps
delaying Lindsey's re-appearance before Starr's grand jury for months. But the
NYT lead editorial still sees plenty of controversy,
calling the tack a "dodge" and describing as "stonewalling" Clinton's refusal
to straight-off cooperate with Starr's "reasonable requests for information in
a legitimate criminal inquiry." What's more, argues the Times the claim
of attorney-client privilege as applied to Mr. Lindsey is "really little more
than another executive privilege claim in disguise," given that lawyer Lindsey
is foremost a political and policy advisor.

            Both the WP front and a piece inside at the NYT report that
Sunday's statement by President Clinton hinting at U.S. support for additional
international financial loans to shore up the Russian economy utterly failed to
have the anticipated soothing effect: Russian stocks fell another ten percent
and the ruble worsened slightly.

            The Wall Street Journal 's political reporting continues to be
disarmingly candid. On the heels of a recent piece that laid bare Trent Lott's
fund-raising, today's Journal surveys the many competing campaign reform bills on the House docket
(one dozen bills; 500 amendments) and concludes that "GOP leaders will assume
the role of full partners in overhaul legislation--in an effort to kill it." In
the end though, observes the paper, it may be a Democrat--Michigan's John
Dingell--who seals campaign reform's fate. He has been collecting Democratic
votes for a commission that would study and recommend further changes in the
system. (A big clue to how lightly Congress takes the issue. When Pearl Harbor
was attacked, FDR didn't appoint a commission to study and recommend further
changes in our defense posture.)

            The LAT front brings word of a legal ruling that may spell trouble for "reality" TV shows like
"Cops" and the use of hidden cameras and microphones by the likes of "60
Minutes" and "PrimeTime Live." The California Supreme Court ruled that
accurate, newsworthy news reports are protected by the First Amendment from
lawsuits merely alleging illegal disclosure of private facts, but the Court
also ruled that story subjects may sue if reporters and/or photographers use
offensive or intrusive methods to get the story. The case prompting the
decision involved a woman car accident victim ministered to by a nurse wearing
a tiny microphone for a TV show featuring real rescues. The woman survived but
the show broadcast her pleas to be allowed to die.

            
               USAT reports that billionaire George Soros has found another
struggling group to give aid to: poverty lawyers. Today, says the paper, with
government legal aid programs on the wane, Soros will launch a
multimillion-dollar initiative to fund 70 two-year public interest fellowships
for young law school grads, supporting their legal efforts on behalf of such
clients as battered women, the homeless, Native Americans and migrant farm
workers.

            Tributes to Barry Goldwater as the last of a breed of terminally
straight-talking politicians continue pouring in, but so far, only David
Broder's encomium mentions that the late Senator once showed reporters the near-nude and suggestively inscribed photo of herself a
woman fan had sent him.

            A bottom front WP story reports that yesterday Al Gore announced an
initiative to have the federal government write its
millions of forms, directive and letters in "plain language." An example he
cited is translating OSHA's "Ways of exit access and the doors to exits to
which they lead shall be so designed and arranged as to be clearly recognizable
as such" as "An exit door must be free of signs or decorations that obscure its
visibility." The Post waggishly provides another example, effectively
Goring the Vice-President: "There is no controlling legal authority that says
this was in violation of the law" should be recast as "There's no law against
it."

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            A Sorry State of Affairs

            
               USA
Today leads with that schoolyard shooting in Arkansas, which also makes
the front at the New York Times ,
Washington Post , and Los Angeles
Times . The WP and LAT lead with President Clinton's
remarks in Uganda about how, with its slave trade, the U.S. wronged Africa. The
NYT goes with the news that the federal government has delayed issuing
tens of thousands of permanent residency permits for immigrants because a new
machine designed to produce fraud-proof green cards hasn't worked right since
it was installed last summer. Few immigrants, says the paper, will suffer dire
consequences but the delay is making many of them panicky.

            Four students and a teacher, all female, died, and ten others were injured
at an Arkansas middle school after two boys--ages 13 and 11--shot at their
classmates pouring out of the school in response to the false fire alarm the
two had pulled. It was, reports USAT , the third school rampage
nationwide in five months. In recent similar incidents, students have killed
five and wounded 14.

            Rising to give a speech at a village outside Kampala, after listening to one
by Ugandan president Yoweri Museveni, President Clinton, according to the
WP , launched into what his aides later said were impromptu remarks about the role the U.S. has played in Africa's
tragedies. "Going back to the time before we were even a nation, European
Americans received the fruits of the slave trade," Clinton said. "And we were
wrong in that." Clinton also admitted that American Cold War policy for Africa
too often resulted in mistakenly supporting ruthless dictators just because
they were anti-communists.

            All the papers point out that previously, Clinton had considered and
rejected the idea of making an official apology to American blacks for slavery.
It was reported that Clinton thought a mea culpa would distract from the real
tasks of racial healing and could alienate white centrist voters. And indeed,
reports the WP , aides repeatedly said Clinton would not issue such an
apology while on the African tour. But, says the paper, Clinton was apparently
taken by the "spirit of the moment." According to the Post , his
spur-of-the-moment thoughts caused "consternation among his traveling
delegation."

            The papers note this vibe but inexplicably internalize it, and generally try
to describe Clinton's speech as something besides what it most obviously is: an
apology for slavery. The WP sees, "not strictly speaking an apology, but
a remarkably all-encompassing statement of contrition." USAT , in its
off-lead, says that with the remarks, Clinton "came as close as he ever has to
apologizing for slavery, and in its lead, the LAT says he "stop[ped]
short of an explicit apology." The NYT front-pager says he stopped "well
short" of one.

            Perhaps what underlies the presidential staff's concern is that the episode
is a clear reminder that Clinton is prone in the heat of the moment to do
things that in cooler moments he very publicly says he wouldn't do. Hoping not
to remind folks about this was one of the reasons handlers were glad to get him
out of town in the first place. And indeed, such concerns explicitly followed
him to Africa: The NYT states that reporters touring the village with
Clinton asked if he was invoking executive privilege in the Monica Lewinsky
matter. Neither the president nor Hillary responded, even though Museveni
called after them to make sure they heard the question.

            In light of the slavery speech, "Today's Papers" wonders how long it will be
before one of Clinton's critics complains that he apologizes for things he
didn't do, instead of apologizing for things he did.

            There's a good-news story in the WP business section--let's
hope it's true. It seems that the CEO of PepsiCo, Roger A. Enrico, has given
his $900,000 salary back to the company and directed that it be used to fund
scholarships for children of the corporation's grunt-level employees. Enrico
intends to do this indefinitely. True, Enrico's annual bonus, which he is not
surrendering, is $1.8 million, but the company says the bonus will not be
enlarged to pick up the slack. The arrangement nearly doubles the company's
scholarship outlays.

            Meanwhile, the WP 's "Reliable Source" column reports that on Monday,
two Washington D.C. bookstores were ordered to turn over to Ken Starr sales records of purchases by Monica Lewinsky. Lewinsky's
lawyer, William Ginsburg is quoted in the Post with this reaction: "We
have now gone from invasion of the right of privacy to Fahrenheit
451 ."

            And on tour with the president in Africa, Jesse
Jackson gives Maureen Dowd his theology of the Lewinsky scandal: "There are
nine more Commandments."

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Prop.-aganda

            A high-fatality, high-injury train wreck in Germany leads at USA Today and
the New York
Times --and pictures of it are on everybody's front. The looming
post-primary fight to reinstate public school bilingual education in California
leads at the Los Angeles Times . The Washington Post goes with the government's decision to
lower what counts as obesity, thereby instantly classifying millions of
Americans as overweight. They won't be able to become thin again by leaving the
country either: the new rules are more in line with those wielded elsewhere.
The Post notes that one of the critics of the move is C. Everett Koop,
who worries that it will discourage people from trying to lose weight.

            There's a lot in the papers about Tuesday's California primaries. The
LAT lead reports that in the wake of the passage of Prop.
227, which ends bilingual education for most students after one year, eight
school districts applied for waivers, but that the state school board will
probably not grant them. Meanwhile, says the LAT , a coalition of civil
rights groups opposing the measure has filed a federal lawsuit. And according
to USAT 's front, the superintendent of San Francisco schools says his
system will not comply with the new law while waiting for the lawsuit to be
resolved. Similarly, the LAT reports that as many as 1,500 L.A. teachers
say they may commit the "equivalent of educational civil disobedience" by not
teaching in English. The story offers a quotation from one teacher saying just
that, but the reader is left mystified as to where the paper came up with the
1,500 figure. Another curiosity: the piece delays until the seventh paragraph
the information that recently, 48 percent of those participating in a L.A.
teachers union election voted for ending bilingual instruction. Statistics
appearing elsewhere on the paper's front also make it clear that this is a more
nuanced issue than the LAT generally makes it seem: 37 percent of
Latinos voted against continued bilingualism, as did 57 percent of Asians.

            A NYT editorial says the defeat in California of several super-rich
candidates "may cause multimillionaires to rethink their plans for midlife
career changes." And a front-page WP piece says this development shows
that with the economy on the rise, the electorate's distaste for professional
politicians is on the wane

            The NYT , WP and the LAT (which carries the WP
story) fronts all report that the FDA has given a company permission to conduct
the world's first full-scale test of an anti-HIV infection
vaccine. The experiment will be conducted with 5,000 uninfected
participants over the next four years. All the pieces mention that such a study
has an inherent conflict: science says don't do anything to cloud the role of
the vaccine, while ethics says do everything. But none give the reader any idea
how this problem can be resolved, and so it's hard to see how the proposed
vaccine tests can avoid coming acropper like the recent controversial AIDS
research in Africa these papers reported on at some length.

            The Wall Street Journal continues to pass along good news for
the auto industry. The latest: sales of cars and light trucks were up 12
percent in May. Special incentive deals have been driving things, so the trend
could cool soon, but in the meantime it's producing some tremendous numbers: GM
minivans, for instance, are up 60.6 percent over a year ago, and for GM sedans,
the surge is 85.7 percent.

            Everybody's inside carries word that President Clinton notified Congress
that he will ask for yet another year of Most Favored Nation status for China,
meaning that China will continue to enjoy the tariff and trade treatment
extended to most other countries trading with the U.S. The WSJ points
out that with the recent ethical and national security controversies
surrounding China, Clinton is now spotlighting Beijing's value as a broker for
peace between India and Pakistan.

            In a WP op-ed titled "I Didn't Get Dumped," former Monica
Lewinsky attorney William Ginsburg settles scores on his way out of town.
Decrying the insular nature of D.C.'s political/legal culture, he observes, "A
person apparently needs a passport to get into Washington." Then comes the
self-praise: "I am.a hell of a trial lawyer, with an innate sense of right and
wrong and up for any fight, even with an anti-constitutional monster." And the
tired excoriation of the press: "To my detractors and the naysayers out there,
otherwise known as "talking heads," or "kibitzers," I say, bah humbug!" And
don't forget the Bulworth reference: "My former client is now represented
by.new counsel, and while I will remain a spirit, not a ghost, they must go
forward and represent her as they know best how to do." All this prose does
nothing so much as convince the reader that Mr. Ginsburg has something in
common with his former client: he probably blew it.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Depo Charge

            
               USA
Today , the New York Times ,
and the Los Angeles Times lead with yesterday's unanimous Supreme
Court decision that the law barring sexual discrimination in the workplace
applies equally to harassment between workers of the same sex. The Washington Post , which runs the Supreme Court story near
the top, goes instead with the most detailed account yet of President Clinton's
deposition in the Paula Jones case. "Today's Papers" couldn't help but notice
that President Clinton didn't comment on the important step the Supreme Court
took to keep the workplace safe from sexual harassment.

            It's just common sense that same sex doesn't automatically mean no
harassment, but the reporting on the decision makes it clear that the
legalities have been murky. According to the NYT , the law of sexual harassment is basically a recent Supreme
Court creation, and broadening its application has met with hostility in lower
courts. The NYT reports that Justice Antonin Scalia's opinion for the
Court--issued in the case of a male oil-rig worker complaining about his
treatment by male co-workers--says the acid test for harassment is not the sex
or motivation of the parties, but whether there is sex-based discrimination in
the workplace "so objectively offensive as to alter the conditions of the
victim's employment."

            Scalia, notes the Times , went on to claim that the decision does not
abrogate all "genuine but innocuous differences in the ways men and women
routinely interact with members of the same sex and of the opposite sex," and
all the papers give his example: a football coach slapping a player's rear on
the way to the field would be lawful, while the same gesture directed at the
coach's (female or male) secretary might not be. All the dailies note that the
decision drew praise from civil rights and gay rights advocates.

            It's interesting to compare the harassment headlines. The NYT says,
"High Court Widens Workplace Claims of Sex Harassment." This is much less clear
than USAT 's "Same-sex Harassment Illegal." (The LAT has virtually
this same to-the-point headline.)

            The Post runs its Clinton lead clear across the top. And once again, photo
editors in effect put an opinion on the front page. The accompanying picture of
Clinton has to be the least attractive one of him ever published: Eyes hooded,
JFK-style, talking out of one side of his mouth.

            This story, about Clinton's January 17th deposition, represents the most
elaborate press account yet of his description of his relationship with Monica
Lewinsky. Clinton testified, says the paper, that the two exchanged gifts and
that she visited him in his office perhaps five times, and that they may have
been alone together. The president denied having sexual relations with
Lewinsky, which for the purposes of the deposition was defined as fondling and
oral sex, but not kissing on the mouth. Clinton said it was his secretary Betty
Currie who initiated career help for Lewinsky.

            In the deposition, Clinton denied that he propositioned Paula Jones and also
denied having sex with three other women he was asked about. He did, however,
say that he'd had sex with Gennifer Flowers--just once, in 1977.

            The Post reports that often during the proceeding's five hours,
Clinton had to be asked to speak up. And, says the paper, at a couple of
points, he reacted to something that was said in a "frustrated outburst." It's
odd that the WP was able to find this out without finding out what
prompted it.

            The story gives a good picture of the personal degradation involved for
Clinton in giving the deposition: there were seventeen people in attendance.
Obviously, at least one of them was the source for this story. Place your money
on Paula Jones and/or one of her six (!) lawyers.

            
               USAT , the LAT , and the NYT all go front page with the
news that choke-out thug Latrell Sprewell was given his gazillion
dollar contract back by an arbitrator. Everybody has this quote from NBA
commissioner David Stern: "You cannot strike your boss and still hold your
job--unless you play in the NBA...."

            The WP reports that, voting along racial lines, the Mississippi state
Senate yesterday rejected a proposal to compensate relatives of those killed in
the state in hate crimes during the civil rights era. Sen. Richard White is
quoted as saying, "I don't think we need to....start scratching these
sores."

            Michael Kelly's WP column about Ken Starr vs. Sidney
Blumenthal has one of the more striking author disclaimers you'll ever see:
"....(full disclosure: I worked with Blumenthal at the New Yorker and
didn't like him.)"

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Gates at the Barbarians

            
               USA
Today leads with the Starr grand jury appearance of Vernon Jordan. The
Washington Post leads with the first-time-ever
congressional testimony of Bill Gates. The Los Angeles
Times goes with the report that the U.N.-approved oil-for-food
exceptions to the trade sanctions on Iraq have primarily benefited Saddam
Hussein and his inner circle. The New York Times
leads with the strong showing of a Hindu nationalist party in the Indian
parliamentary elections. Neither the LAT nor NYT leads make
anybody else's front page. Jordan and Gates, on the other hand, get lots of
attention everywhere.

            It's widely reported that Jordan testified for more than five hours, and
that he answered every question--mostly about the nature of the career planning
assistance he extended to Monica L. as a favor to the president. USAT
says Jordan's appearance marks a "pivotal stage" in the Lewinsky investigation.
The WP and NYT stress that Jordan's courthouse-steps affirmation
of his friendship with President Clinton was mighty reassuring to the White
House. Both the WP and NYT note the fancy Jordan security
arrangements--the Post calls them "almost royal treatment." He ate his
lunch ("hearty vegetable soup"--thanks WP ) surrounded by three federal
bodyguards, just a few tables over from the unguarded prosecutors who had been
grilling him.

            The WP lead says that Gates was "assailed" at the hearings, for
suppressing competition, by some of the business rivals he appeared with, as
well as by some senators. Gates' response that government intervention, not his
company, is the big threat to technological innovation, is widely quoted. But
hearing chairman Sen. Orrin Hatch opined afterwards that Microsoft is a
monopoly. An idea, says the LAT , Gates "scoffs" at.

            The Post points out that the Senate doesn't even allow laptop
computers in its chamber, but that nonetheless some of the questioning of Gates
by Hatch had a "laser-like precision." The LAT and NYT describe Gates as
the richest man in America. The WP says he's the richest man in the
world.

            The Gates appearance certainly brings out criticism of his Slate
diary entries. The WP 's "Reliable Source" column says, "A scintillating
read, they are not," and Maureen Dowd says they make Gates' life "sound as
boring as ours."

            According to the Wall Street Journal "Tax Report," as of last Friday, the
IRS had issued 12% more money in income-tax refunds than the year before. The
IRS says that's because more people are filing electronically.

            There's considerable coverage today given to a seven word addition Vermont
Sen. Patrick Leahy inserted in a bill about federal Great Lake research money
that had the effect of making his state eligible for the funds for the first
time. The sentence declares Lake Champlain to be a Great Lake. The bill will,
says the NYT , probably be signed by President Clinton. George Will makes fun of the move in his column and a
NYT editorial points out that other lakes, such as Utah's
Great Salt Lake, are far better claimants. The editorial runs under the header,
"Maybe It's An Ocean."

            It's a shame federal monies are used up this way when they could be better
used for things like the government's program to provide close captioning for
television shows. But then we learn in today's Post that the program
funds captioning for "Jerry Springer" and "Baywatch." ("Today's
Papers" didn't even realize those shows have soundtracks.)

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Galluping Off to War?

            
               USA
Today leads with new poll results indicating that Americans are even
more hawkish about Iraq than the White House. The Washington Post and New York Times
go with U.S. maneuvers to limit U.N. Secretary-General Annan's ability to
independently negotiate with Saddam Hussein. And the Los Angeles
Times leads with the Clinton administration push for tighter regulation
of managed care.

            In the latest USAT /CNN/Gallup Poll, 76 percent of respondents approve
of air strikes, while 60 percent go beyond the Clinton administration and also
support the use of ground troops against Iraq. And by two to one, those
surveyed support the idea of removing Saddam from power over President
Clinton's goal of merely substantially reducing his ability to use weapons of
mass destruction. The NYT front seems to find a more conflicted public:
"While most people seem to believe the United States should take action against
Iraq, there is plenty of doubt, and almost universal exasperation that American
forces might once again be placed in harm's way." But USAT does find
that support for removing Saddam falls significantly when questions assumed
substantial U.S. or Iraqi casualties, or damage to U.S. ties with Arab
allies.

            The NYT , WP , and USAT leads all report that the U.S.
was instrumental in keeping the five permanent members of the U.N. Security
Council from endorsing Annan's goal of going to Baghdad to independently
negotiate a settlement. The U.S. position is to accept nothing less than total
weapons inspection access.

            The Wall Street Journal and WP fronts continue the
dailies' rather unprecedented disclosure of the current thinking of U.S. war
planners. The Journal says that even with a new wavelet of improved
weapons, the top brass doubts that the air attacks they're planning can
destroy all of Iraq's most terrible weapons or even change Saddam's behavior.
Among the grounds for doubt ticked off by the Journal : U.S. targeters
aren't really sure where the special weapons plants are, and don't know what to
do about "dual use" targets like hospitals that are also used to produce
biological weapons. The Post reports, based on several unnamed
well-placed Pentagon sources, that unlike in the Gulf War, the preponderance of
planned strikes are now targeted against so-called "leadership" targets: not so much air defense sites or depots, as,
for example, secret police headquarters. The paper says the administration
doesn't want to advertise this.

            The LAT lead about managed care reform covers ground
first staked out by a NYT lead a few months ago. The reason it's back in
the news is that legislation drafted by Democrats that requires federal
standards for health insurance plans and an appeals process to enforce them
will be taken up when Congress returns from recess next week. The managed care
industry and the nation's largest employers will fight this vehemently, the
LAT says.

            Despite Bill Clinton's public pledge to cooperate fully with Ken Starr's
investigation, the LAT front reports that the president has been using
"one of the best tools available" for frustrating a criminal
investigation--namely, entering into joint defense agreements with others being
investigated in the case. Such agreements, says the paper, have allowed the
president's defense team to learn what questions are being posed and what
answers given during grand jury sessions. The paper suggests that both
Clinton's secretary Betty Currie and White House steward Bayani Nelvis have
entered into such agreements with BC. Presidential lawyers tell the LAT
that they expect Starr to challenge these agreements.

            All too often the contemporary newspaper correction resembles one of those
joke business cards that say, "See other side" on both sides. Witness today's correction in the WP : "In an article Sunday,
former CIA director Robert M. Gates said that during the 1991 Persian Gulf War,
U.S. officials were "hoping" that Iraqi President Saddam Hussein would be
killed in a bombing raid. The headline on the story incorrectly characterized
U.S. policy regarding Saddam Hussein's death." Notice that this doesn't include
either the original headline or an explanation of the way in which it was
incorrect in its characterization. It's only when the reader digs out the
Sunday article that he learns the headline referred to Saddam's death as a Gulf
War "goal." By hiding the ball this way, the Post misses the chance to
explore the intelligence community sophistry at work here. Ordinarily, if you
hope for something and do things that ordinarily could be expected to bring it
about, then it would count as one of your goals. But because the U.S.
government operates under a presidential executive order forbidding the
assassination of foreign leaders, U.S. military planners who want to eliminate
a foreign leader have to perfect the mental trick of hoping for e.g. Saddam's
death as they plan to e.g. bomb the building where they know he sleeps, but at
the same time being genuinely surprised if he were to die as a result.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Suharto Say Goodbye

            The continuing Indonesia turmoil leads at USA Today and
the New York Times
and is the top non-local story at the Washington Post and Los Angeles
Times . Suharto's surprise announcement that he would step down failed
to ease political tensions, because he described a gradual and vague transition
to a successor, and the thousands of student protesters want him out now. "If
tomorrow Suharto does not step down, there will be a lot of trouble," one
protester tells USAT . The LAT says it now seems likely Suharto
will go.

            The papers say that the nation's top opposition leader had called for a
million demonstrators to take to the streets of Jakarta, and that the military,
primarily via stern television messages, urged them not to. The WP 's
veteran correspondent Keith Richburg says the scene at the Indonesian parliament, where students have
taken over the grounds and buildings, is "eerily reminiscent of Beijing's
Tiananmen Square." Mirroring earlier reporting, the NYT says relations between the students and troops appear
friendly.

            A State Department spokesman is quoted in USAT and the WP
saying that because of the upheaval, the IMF will probably delay delivery of
its next bailout payment. The World Bank has already done this.

            The WP confuses with a front-page piece asking whether comparing
health insurers' reimbursement handling of Viagra to their handling of birth
control pills reveals a bias towards men. The second paragraph of the story says
that more than half of Viagra prescriptions are being subsidized by health
plans, and the sixth paragraph says that slightly more than half of all birth
control pills are. Where's the bias? Why do we need this story?

            The NYT 's front reports on the first hard political consequences of
the China money-for-missile-technology charges it aired last week: Newt
Gingrich announced Tuesday he'll seek to set up a special House panel to look into the allegations. The story also
makes the USAT front, where Gingrich is quoted saying, "This a deeper
question than anything that has arisen before in this administration." Gingrich
also tells the paper that President Clinton should not embark on a planned trip
to China until he answers to Congress.

            A shocking episode reported in a buried wire story in
yesterday's WP moves up to page two in today's Post . Last
Saturday while playing basketball near a hospital emergency room, a fifteen
year-old boy was shot. Emergency room doctors and nurses were notified of the
situation by a police officer, but citing hospital policy, they refused to
leave the emergency room to come to his aid--thirty-five feet away. And refused
to lend the cop a gurney. Ninety minutes later, the boy was dead. "I will be
finishing my thirty-fourth year as an officer," said the policeman, "and I have
never seen anything like this."

            The editorials continue to weigh in on the lawsuits brought against
Microsoft. The LAT lead editorial, "Bill Gates is Wrong," takes exception
to Gates' Coke/Pepsi analogy by saying, "Microsoft's ambition to have Windows
play an integral role in virtually every American lifestyle is more like Coke
telling Americans that from now on it will be their beverage, main course and
dessert." (It seems that the law of beverage monopoly is wondrously
complex--"Today's Papers" recalls not being able to bring its own beer into
Dodger Stadium and not being able to get a Coke at a Taco Bell.) In any case,
warns the LAT , if Microsoft doesn't compromise, it could find itself
being broken up by the Justice Department into "Baby Bills."

            Remember that scene in "Sleeper" where it's revealed that in the future
everybody knows the only really healthy substances are red meat and cigarettes?
Well, today's WP runs a story headlined "Smoking May Protect Some High-Risk Women
from Breast Cancer." Seems that for two types of breast cancer that comprise
about ten percent of all cases, what's lucky is a...Lucky.

            A front-page Wall Street Journal feature visits the mercenary mouths
behind political campaign commercials. A small coterie of voice-over
specialists, it turns out, earn over $500,000 a year narrating the commercials
for hundreds of candidates. New phone technology allows them to do this from
their own houses with assembly-line efficiency and relieves them of the onerous
chore of actually meeting the candidates. One of these elite announcers,
reports the Journal , once inadvertently worked for both sides of a
campaign.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Butt Heads Butt Heads

            The en masse defection of the major tobacco manufacturers from Congress'
efforts at a settlement leads everywhere. The industry promises to immediately
launch a public relations offensive against a "coercive, Big Brother-type
Congress." The Washington Post says the campaign kicks off today with
newspaper ads reading, "We Agreed To Change The Way We Do Business . . . Not To
Go Out Of Business." Everybody quotes President Clinton's determined reaction:
"They can be part of it or they can fight it," although oddly, USA Today
leaves out the most important part of his quote: "We're going to get this
done."

            The tobacco stance became official with a speech against the tough and
expensive Senate bill by the RJR CEO, Steven Goldstone, described by the papers
as "aggressive" and "defiant." Goldstone is widely quoted as saying,
"Washington has rushed to collect more tobacco revenues while playing the
politics of punishment." USAT quotes him describing the process as
"broken beyond repair." The Los Angeles Times adds that Goldstone raised the
specter of a thriving black market in cigarettes if the Senate bill were to
become law.

            The New York Times
and USAT point out that while Congress can proceed unilaterally in many
areas of the proposed legislation, this is problematic with the provisions that
touch on the curtailment of free speech, such as advertising restrictions.
Goldstone is quoted in the Times saying that if Congress imposes these
anyway, the companies "will fight in court." Feelings are running just as high
on the other side. The paper quotes the reaction of Sen. Kent Conrad: "Poor
babies." Both the NYT and WP note that Conrad expressed the idea
that all this tobacco manufacturer stridency is a stratagem designed to get the
current deal accepted without the addition of any harsher conditions.

            The NYT is admirably clear about the context producing such
skepticism: "The tobacco industry has dissembled so often in the past--about
whether cigarettes cause diseases, about whether nicotine is addictive, about
whether they market their product to children--that people are never sure what
to make of the companies' pronouncements." Now, if only the Times had
said "lied" instead of "dissembled"...

            The Wall Street Journal seems a little less surprised by all
this, claiming that "the reality is that tobacco companies for weeks have been
closed out of the legislative process." The Journal also sends along
word that Mississippi Attorney General Michael Moore, an architect of last
summer's original tobacco deal, says he understands the industry position and
calls on President Clinton and Congress to convene new negotiations.

            And lest we forget what this is all about, the WP reports that
a study in today's New England Journal of Medicine
suggests that non-smokers not only live longer, but have less sickness and
dependence on others in their last years.

            The WSJ and WP each run stories describing a new study
purporting to show that the differences between black and white investors are
considerable. Among those with incomes above $50,000, only 57 percent of the
blacks had money in the stock market, compared to 81 percent of the whites. And
while only 13 percent of the whites believed Social Security will provide at
least half their retirement income, 25 percent of blacks thought this.

            The NYT front reports that President Clinton has ordered the Departments of Defense, State, and
Justice to devise plans for the arrest and trial of Pol Pot, the Khmer
Rouge leader responsible for the death of perhaps a million Cambodians in the
1970s. According to the paper, the opportunity presents itself because the
Khmer Rouge, which has Pol Pot under house arrest, is in complete disarray.
Hmmm...wonder if the Khmer Rouge subscribes to the Times ...

            In a NYT op-ed, Andrew Sullivan assesses the career thus far of the
military's "don't ask, don't tell" policy. Sullivan notes that under the
policy, discharges of homosexuals have increased 67 percent (80 percent if you
figure in downsizing). Bill Clinton, Sullivan observes, has now fired more
homosexuals than any other employer in America.

            The front page of the NYT national edition brings word that, buoyed
by the soaring approval ratings of the sex-scandalized Bill Clinton, the
sex-scandalized Bob Packwood wants to get back in the game. He's thinking about
running for the Oregon state legislature. "Today's Papers" has just the
campaign slogan for him: "Still Packing Wood."

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Goodbye, Columbus?

            The Washington Post and New York Times
lead with the Clinton administration's post-Columbus moves to shore up public
support for its Iraq stance, with the Post reporting that critics of a
U.S. air assault now include Jimmy Carter. The Los Angeles
Times goes with the brewing dispute between Kenneth Starr and senior
Clinton aides he is questioning over whether or not they are relieved from
answering by executive privilege. USA Today
leads with the arrest of two men, one of them a neo-Nazi, for possession of
suspected anthrax for use as a weapon. Allegedly, the men were plotting to
deploy the agent in the New York City subway system--yeah right, like anthrax
could survive that. The anthrax story also makes the NYT and LAT
fronts, but is pushed inside at the WP .

            The WP reports that President Clinton warned Saddam Hussein not to mistake the
skeptical questions raised at the raucous Columbus forum as a sign that
Americans lack resolve for military action. This comment came, says the
Post , as a new poll shows 63 percent of respondents support bombing Iraq
if it doesn't stop interfering with weapons inspectors. The poll's fine points
are a little more confusing, however. 56 percent of the respondents say the
U.S. should try to force Saddam from power, but 56 percent also say they oppose
a U.S. invasion with ground troops. This sort of free-lunch result is an
American polling staple--it's just like all those polls that show folks want a
balanced budget, but not higher taxes or reduced Social Security or Medicare
benefits.

            The NYT 's coverage of the hearts and mind stage of the
Iraq run-up suggests more of an uphill battle than does the WP 's: "A day
after U.S. policy toward Iraq was passionately picked apart at a town hall
meeting in Ohio, President Clinton tried to reassemble the pieces.."

            The NYT reports this comment on the Columbus protests made by Sen.
Barbara Mikulski of Maryland to Clinton as he appeared with her at an event on
Thursday: "You and the first lady weren't exactly angelic a couple of years
ago. I don't think you've done too bad being a protester."

            The LAT lead states that presidential confidant Bruce Lindsey
declined to answer some questions during his two-day Starr grand jury
appearance, which, the paper says, set the stage for a "Watergate-style battle"
over the use of executive privilege.

            A NYT editorial weighs in on this dispute, taking the
position that as long as Starr's questions "stick to the pertinent issues," and
stay out of say, "military options in Iraq," they should be answered. Of
course, what counts as pertinent to Whitewater has already been loosened
considerably, and could get looser. If, for instance, there was prima facie
evidence that President Clinton had discussed Iraq moves with Lewinsky, then by
the same logic that got us here, Ken Starr would be entitled to question her
about that too.

            
               USAT reports that Vernon Jordan met four times with Lewinsky, but
never mentions that this was first reported yesterday by the WP .

            "Well, O.K., maybe not all our promises." The LAT front and
the WP inside feature stories stating that Promise Keepers is so
strapped financially that it will soon stop paying its 345 salaried
employees.

            The Wall Street Journal main "Politics and Policy" piece has a
tidy break-out of lessons learned by both sides in the Gulf War. According to
the Journal , it's US: Minimize casualties, both civilian and military;
stealth technology works; precision-guided munitions work; you need to be able
to deploy quickly; and air power is more effective now than in the past. And
Saddam: Survival is victory; Americans don't like casualties on either side;
bring in foreign TV, but not foreign print reporters; portray yourself as the
victim, not the bully, and don't slug it out, but "shoot and scoot." The paper
says Pentagon officials suspect the Iraqi secret police may be keeping the
bodies of executed political prisoners in cold storage, to be blown up and
distributed wherever American bombs drop.

            The WSJ has these Monica tidbits: 1) Vernon Jordan isn't part of the
joint defense agreement entered into by many other grand-jury witnesses with
White House ties. 2) The House Judiciary Committee is making plans to hire 18
"new" lawyers for a possible impeachment inquiry. For the sake of the republic,
"Today's Papers" hopes the Journal means "additional."

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Shakti Waves

            Nuclear proliferation is the story of the day. Pakistan's possible imminent
test of a nuclear bomb leads at USA Today, and the Washington Post, and is also the subject of a Wall Street Journal piece tipped high in the paper's front-page
news box. The confirmation by experts that last week India detonated a hydrogen
bomb leads at the New York Times. And the Los Angeles Times
goes with the Group of Eight's struggle to devise a nuclear strategy.

            Pakistan's foreign minister said Sunday that despite appeals from President
Clinton and other world leaders, his government has decided to conduct a
nuclear test, reports USAT , the NYT and the WSJ . And this
is what the USAT and WSJ headlines say. But the papers also
report that others in the government say the decision has not been made yet.
WP quotes Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott, who had just left
Pakistan, as saying that his delegation left believing the Pakistanis were
still undecided. The LAT sums up the situation with its off-lead
headline "Pakistan Sends Mixed Signals." President Clinton is quoted by
USAT saying that a Pakistan test is "a nutty way to go." The G-8 summit
refused to follow Clinton's lead and impose sanctions against India, reports
USAT , instead issuing a resolution condemning its nuclear testing. The
LAT calls this a "toothless statement."

            Meanwhile, according to USAT and the NYT , India ratcheted the
situation with its announcement that its nuclear missile program is all but
ready. The Times explains this means the country now has a nuke that can
be delivered from a plane, or launched from the ground or the sea. According to
Indian scientists, says the NYT , the hydrogen bomb (code-named Shakti-1,
from the Hindi word for "power") they set off is considerably smaller than the
largest hydrogen bombs tested by the U.S., Russia and the other established
nuclear powers. The Indians say they kept their bomb "small" to avoid damage to
nearby populated villages. One Indian scientist quoted by the Times says
of larger bombs, "If there is a demand, we will do it." An American expert
tells the paper that Indian claims about having exploded a hydrogen bomb and
being able to explode bigger ones is quite believable. The Times says
Western experts have known that Pakistan could build an atomic bomb, but aren't
sure about a hydrogen bomb.

            As with its reporting on the original Indian announcement of the tests last
week, the Times captures the national pride they have inspired, a
feeling the paper likens to the way we felt about our original astronauts.
Cheers were heard, for instance, on the videotape of last Monday's blasts.

            Sunday's NYT front ran a Jeff Gerth/David Sanger piece reporting at
length on what was suggested in Friday's Gerth piece on the Chinese/DNC
connection: that the Chinese monies paved the way for President Clinton's
approval of the export of satellite technology to China. In today's
Times , USAT and the WP , Clinton is quoted, "All the
foreign policy decisions we made were based on what we believed...were in the
best interests of the American people." In his column today, William Safire
calls Clinton the "Proliferation President," arguing that his willingness to
export the technology strengthened China's satellite and missile technology,
which scared India into joining the nuclear club, which scared Pakistan, which
China can now aid with advanced missile weaponry.

            In a WP op-ed, budget analyst Scott Hodge takes a look at the $200
billion highway bill, which, critics claim, is full of gold-plated projects.
Actually, argues Hodge, it's worse than that: it would be far cheaper--less
than half the cost--if the entire Interstate Highway System was just
gold-plated.

            According to information in Sunday's NYT "Week in Review," there's
one respect in which India has no peer in the nuclear club: Almost half a
billion of its citizens don't have toilets.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Emerging Measures

            The Citicorp and Travelers Group deal--the largest corporate merger ever--is
everybody's lead. Associated business and policy and personality stories take
up much of the rest of the day's news hole.

            The resulting insurance, banking and securities company will be called
Citigroup (narrowly edging out Travelerscorp, Groupcorp, Corpgroup,
Corptravelers, and Groupciti, we hear) and will become the fifth largest
American corporation. The newspapers' accounts of the size of the deal vary
somewhat: the New York Times
says it's $70 billion, the Washington Post says $82 billion. USA Today ,
the Los
Angeles Times and Wall Street Journal say it's $83 billion. The NYT
figure apparently doesn't take into account the increase in the companies'
shares during the Wall St. explosion--the Dow closed over 9000 for the first
time ever--the deal touched off.

            The papers report that the new financial services company will offer
"one-stop shopping" for consumers and corporations. The NYT and
WP are somewhat breathless about the possibility, but the LAT
says it's not at all clear that consumers want this, noting that previous
efforts to offer it have "generally failed." The WSJ elaborates, pointing out that previous
high-profile attempts by American Express and Sears to cross-pollinate with
Wall St. partners failed. In addition, notes the Journal , creating a
huge full-service financial edifice flies in the face of the trend toward
discount brokerage firms and cheap on-line trading.

            The dailies emphasize that the most striking part of the deal is that
current laws, in force since the Depression, prevent financial cross-selling on
this scale. The deal boldly challenges all this, says the WP , putting
pressure on Congress and regulators to change the status quo, in the next five
years before the deal goes into full effect. The NYT calls this feature
remarkable "brashness," and the LAT says it is its "most remarkable
aspect." Another pressure factor is that it's widely believed this merger will
inspire other similar ones.

            Another unusual aspect of the deal drawing lots of comment is that
Travelers' Sanford Weill and Citicorp's John Reed have decided to rule their
new kingdom as co-CEOs. A piece on the USAT "Money" front page says
experts are dubious about the arrangement. The WSJ wonders if the two
men can "merge their egos." And the NYT business section piece on the
relationship runs under the header, "The Odd Couple."

            Weill and Reed are quoted as saying the merger will not produce large-scale
layoffs. But, notes the WSJ , layoffs of over 1,000 employees followed
each of Weill's previous big deals.

            As has become common in merger reporting, some of the papers attempt to
cloak the event in intrigue and drama. The Journal and the NYT
try to summon atmosphere with their descriptions of early meetings where the
top dogs sniffed each other. And the WP says "the excitement was
palpable" during Monday's news conference at the Waldorf announcing the merger,
with the arrival of Weill and Reed reminding the paper of nothing so much as
"the arrival of movie stars at the Academy Awards." But the excitement is not
infectious: after all, what you have here basically is suits writing checks to
themselves.

            Indeed, the only real corrective to all the day's money euphoria comes in
the WP front-page piece, "Boom Is Fine--If You Own
Stock," which notes that six of every ten American households still do not
own any shares of anything.

            The LAT front reports that the California Supreme Court handed a
defeat to unwed fathers with its ruling Monday that a man who fathers a child
with a women who is married to someone else may be denied all legal parental
rights. As the paper points out, this is significant in a state where a third
of the children are born to couples who are not married to each other.

            If you missed the two top stories in yesterday's USAT --the
government's first post-deregulation attempt to preserve competitiveness among
airlines and the emergence of a drug that can prevent breast cancer--they are
on the NYT 's front today.

            The WP runs a piece inside reporting that during a church service
last Sunday, Cardinal John O'Connor of New York criticized President
Clinton from the pulpit for taking Catholic communion while in South
Africa. The South African priest who invited Clinton to do so is quoted in the
paper as saying that once Clinton stood up, he was thinking about "how much
embarrassment it would have caused him by my saying, please sit down."

            Novelist Lucian Truscott IV, a former Army officer and son and grandson of
generals, writes a NYT op-ed in support of the Clinton administration's
latest assault weapons ban. Truscott compares the intensive training you get in
the Army with one of these weapons long before you're ever allowed to fire it,
and then only under the supervision of an expert marksman, with the situation
in states like Arkansas, where "it's legal for a 10-year-old to own a
semiautomatic assault weapon without a moment of safety instruction, training
in how to shoot it or adult supervision."

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Televisionaries

            USA Today
and the Washington Post lead with the FAA's grounding of the oldest 737
passenger jets. The national edition of the New York
Times leads with the U.S. decision to give Benjamin Netanyahu two more
weeks to reply to its proposal that Israel undertake a more substantial
withdrawal from the West Bank. But the later metro edition of the Times
leads with news of an imminent $60 billion phone company merger. The Los Angeles Times
goes with Sinn Fein's overwhelming endorsement of the Northern Ireland peace
deal.

            The 737 inspections ordered by the FAA last week (which USAT alone
led with on Friday) were apparently well warranted: 13 of the first 26 fuel
main fuel pump wires checked showed wear on their insulation, says USAT .
The WP is a little more reader-friendly about the actual
number of planes involved: it says every one of the first 13 planes checked
show some insulation chafing (the NYT , in its front-page story, says instead that this was
true of a majority of the first 13 planes looked at), and that the grounding
order affects 179 U.S. planes and 193 others worldwide. The Post also
helpfully explains that the order only affects planes at least 16 years old.
USAT reports that one 737 with 60,000 flight hours showed clear signs of
sparking in one location inside its main tank and bare wire in another. This is
of concern because electrical sparking inside a fuel tank is now suspected of
having brought down TWA Flight 800. (The story is also front-page at the
LAT .)

            SBC Communications (formerly Southwestern Bell), the West's dominant local
phone company is, reports the Times , set to acquire Ameritech, its counterpart in the Midwest, thus becoming
the nation's largest local phone company and recreating much of the old Bell
phone system. The paper reminds those scoring at home that the $60 billion
merger is the second largest in corporate history, trailing only March's $70
billion Citicorp/Travelers Group union. (And if you are meticulously updating
your copy of this list, odds are you are not scoring at home.) The lengthy
Wall Street Journal account points out that unlike many of
the recent mergers, which have at least attempted a merger of the CEOs as well,
in this deal the Ameritech brass are bailing out (with golden parachutes of
course). The story also makes the USAT front.

            The deep thoughts of television's top executives as they existentially
struggle with life after Seinfeld are on display in a NYT front-page
effort by its TV bigfoot Bill Carter. According to the Times , the mental
life of the tube titans is very complicated, struggling as they do with such
conundrums as the erosion of network share of the total viewing audience, age
demographic nuances, and the thinning of the talent and writing pools. Thank
God for Robert Iger, president of ABC, who has worked out what will surely soon
be known as the Unified Field Theory: "We'd do ourselves a world of good if we
took out the bottom third of our schedule, which is not only performing in
mediocre fashion but which is often mediocre in quality, and replaced it with a
higher quality program."

            
               Poor word choice or obituary humor ? Sunday's NYT carried the
obit of Paul G. Hearne, wheel-chair-bound his whole life but a tireless
advocate for the disabled who, among other accomplishments, helped write the
Americans With Disabilities Act. The write-up described Hearne as a
"wheeler-dealer."

            The WP recently reported that a civilian security guard on duty near
the Pentagon accidentally shot and killed a homeless man. A little story, yes,
but leave it to a Post reader to see the larger point. Why, Howard
Fenton asks, in a letter to the editor today, does the Pentagon of all places
have to contract out for protective services?

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Clinton's New Organ Policy

            
               USA
Today leads with a Clinton administration proposal for new rules
governing transplant organ availability. The New York Times
goes with the decision by Switzerland's three biggest banks to negotiate a
global settlement with Holocaust victims by setting up a compensation fund. The
plan does not include the Swiss government, whose central bank received the
vast majority of wealth stolen by Nazis from Jews and other persecuted groups.
The Los
Angeles Times leads with depressing news about California's second-tier
state college system: an overwhelming number of its incoming students lack the
basic math and English skills they should have acquired in high school. The
Washington Post lead headline is a hardy perennial,
relating to one of the worst public education systems in the country: "D.C.
Schools Chief Resigns."

            The new transplant rules, explains the USAT lead (and front-page
pieces in the WP , and the NYT ), aim at providing organs to the
sickest candidates first regardless of where they live, as opposed to the
current ones, which were conceived when organs couldn't be maintained outside
the body for nearly as long as they can now, and hence emphasize getting them
to the closest candidates. The private network that coordinates most organ
distribution opposes the shift, because of a fear that this change will atrophy
local transplant centers by diverting organs to a handful of large regional
ones, and also deny organs to people who can't travel. The papers all point out
that under the status quo, more than 4,000 Americans die annually while waiting
for needed organs.

            The LAT front reports that just two days before the NCAA Final Four
tournament game, a federal grand jury in Chicago has indicted two former Northwestern University players on charges of
attempting to fix the outcome of games for the benefit of bettors during the
1994-1995 college season. This is a "stinging blow" to the sport, says the
paper, because Northwestern has the reputation of placing academics above
athletics. The NYT runs the indictments story inside, adding that a
nationwide survey of Division I basketball and football players showed that 4
percent said they had gambled on a game they had played in.

            The papers note that Bill Clinton appeared in South Africa yesterday
alongside Nelson Mandela, but none could be bothered to put their stories about
the appearance--simply unthinkable as recently as four or five years ago--on
the front page. All the visit gets is front-page pictures with "reefer"
captions pointing to stories inside. This judgment is especially hard to
understand given yesterday's GOP charges that some spots in Clinton's traveling
delegation were in effect sold to mega donors to Democratic Party coffers,
making the trip a sort of flying Lincoln bedroom. By the way, over a
non-descript editorial, the WP serves up the perfect headline for
Clinton's apology-strewn safari: "Guilt Trip."

            Front-page pieces in the NYT and USAT report that one of the
Jonesboro shooting suspects is asking for his pastor and the other is crying
for his mother. And an inside NYT piece addresses the question raised
yesterday by TP about what the rules are nowadays governing identifying juveniles in the
paper. Almost every editor questioned says the crucial fact pushing
disclosure was that the names were already out there, in the local paper and on
the Internet. This is another example, like the tabloidization of the
mainstream press, where the dwarfs have ended up controlling the giants.

            The Wall Street Journal reports that Senate Judiciary Committee
Chairman Orrin Hatch is demanding that Microsoft allow its licensees and
partners to speak with Senate investigators despite nondisclosure rules in MS
contracts. Backing the demand is the committee's ranking Democrat, Sen. Patrick
Leahy, up to now a MS supporter.

            The national conversation on sexual harassment gets curiouser and curiouser.
Now comes Abe Rosenthal, who responds to Gloria Steinem's Times op-ed
from earlier in the week with one of his own. Steinem had argued that if an
uninvited sexual gesture by a man is met with noncompliance by a woman and then
is not followed up by him, no sexual harassment has occurred. Rosenthal
counters with a family secret. Many years ago, his older sister was walking in
the park when a man exposed himself to her. She screamed and ran home, where
she came down with a cold and then pneumonia and then a few days later, died.
Rosenthal's counter to Steinem is that mere uninvited sexual gestures can
be...fatal. This is a sad, sad story, but legally and morally irrelevant. To
think otherwise is to opt for making coming up behind someone and saying "Boo"
a crime, because yes, it just might possibly scare him to death.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Today's Special

            What's so special about special prosecutors these days? USA Today and
the Los
Angeles Times lead with Janet Reno's decision to ask that one be
appointed to investigate if Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt's decision to
reject a casino application opposed by major Democratic party contributors had
any connection to subsequent donations they made. The New York Times
leads with Kenneth Starr's unprecedented subpoenaing of members of President
Clinton's Secret Service detail. The Washington Post goes with the revelation that U.N. weapons
inspectors have uncovered evidence that in 1995 Russia had agreed to sell Iraq
sophisticated equipment that could be used to develop biological weapons. This
disclosure, says the WP , puts a new spin on Russia's recent diplomatic
efforts to modify the inspection procedures applying to Iraq: perhaps they are
designed, not to head off a war, but to keep such mass destruction fingerprints
from being lifted.

            Our grandchildren may look back at this as the year when the branch of the
Cabinet known as Special Prosecutions started on its way to becoming the
largest single entity in the federal government (Motto: "The Purpose of
Government is to Investigate Government"). USAT and the NYT (in
its front-page piece) note this is Reno's fourth request for a special
prosecutor looking into a Clinton Cabinet officer and the Times adds
it's the sixth one appointed overall during the Clinton administration. The
Times goes on to observe that this is the first Clinton-era outside
inquiry into political fund-raising. (You'll recall Reno declined to go the
special prosecutor route over Clinton-Gore coffees and phone calls.)

            The papers all emphasize, however, that Reno's request is "very narrow in
scope" (the NYT 's words). And the LAT says any subsequent
broadening of this mandate would be "unusual." Hmmm.perhaps someone should
check this with that key figure in 1970s Arkansas real estate deals, Monica
Lewinsky.

            Starr's move on the Secret Service raises novel arguments. Agents have
testified before (most famously about the Watergate taping system), but never
about what they saw or heard the president do. As a WP editorial points
out, the agents are law enforcement officers and so shouldn't be any more
silent about illegal activities than say, an Arkansas state trooper. But on the
other hand, the NYT points out that the Secret Service argues that if a
president physically distances himself from his protective detail out of fears
for his confidentiality, security is compromised.

            More Monica news: Marcia Lewis' second day of grand jury testimony ended
abruptly, says the NYT , when she became physically and emotionally
unable to continue. She's expected back today. Her daughter will nestle into
that pre-warmed hot seat early next week.

            The USAT front carries word that the EPA is considering requiring
local water systems to issue reports on the chemical contents of their water to
consumers. The story also makes the LAT and WP , which reports
that the FDA is considering requiring similar labeling on bottled water. This
is key: without the ability to know what's in tap water alternatives, knowing
what's in tap water isn't worth much.

            A Wall Street Journal "Politics and Policy" piece on
the post-affirmative action drive to do away with SATs as a college admissions
tool reports that after the Texas legislature passed a law that in effect
replaced SAT scores with high school class rank, Texas A & M University
found that some high schools are reporting that 25 percent of their students
are in the top 10 percent of the class.

            A letter to the editor in the NYT points out there was
something odd in the recent Times charge in an editorial that President
Clinton can't prove his sweeping assertion that Kenneth Starr has illegally
leaked grand jury testimony. The writer notes that the Times could help
in this regard, since it has run stories apparently benefiting from leaked
information relating to grand jury testimony. But although the topic is
important enough for a NYT editorial, don't look for any Times
news stories to really dig into such leaks, as they are the lifeblood of the
paper's scandal coverage.

            Readers are asked at this point to observe a moment of silence. After
yesterday's nee-saying debacle, TP's eighth-grade French teacher, Mme. Teller,
hung herself.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Saddam But True

            The New York Times
leads with a story nobody else is paying much attention to right now--the
continued Iraqi failure to provide U.N. weapons inspectors with adequate
information. USA Today leads with Ken Starr's and Paula Jones' decisions
to press on. The Washington Post goes with a story that the NYT got out in
front on yesterday: the death of Pol Pot. The Los Angeles
Times leads with news that must strike terror deep within the hearts of
its readership: the state's second largest phone company, GTE, mistakenly
leased tens of thousands of unlisted phone numbers to telemarketers.

            The Times lead is spurred by the latest report from the U.N.
chief arms inspector to Kofi Annan concluding that Iraq is no closer now to
meeting U.N. requirements for the lifting of sanctions than it was last fall,
when Saddam Hussein went to the brink to prevent further arms inspections. The
paper sees a further ominous sign in Thursday's new outburst of Iraqi
defiance--a call by the highest levels of the Iraqi government for the
immediate lifting of all embargoes.

            The NYT has some choice tidbits from that as-yet unpublished U.N.
report (and from others as well). Apparently, inspectors found some of the
buildings on their list to have been stripped of all equipment and even
furniture. Indeed, none of the sites visited outside of Baghdad had either
documents or computers. And some inspectors were stunned by the opulence of the
presidential palaces. Some rooms in them must have, according to some on the
U.N. team, cost millions of dollars to furnish.

            The Post reports that Pol Pot died quietly on a flowered mattress. The story goes
on to describe televised footage of the death scene: Pot's body stretched out
on a bed, plastic sandals at his bedside. Or you could turn to the NYT
top front, which has a large color shot of just this scene. The WP
quotes journalist Nate Thayer, who recently did the first interview with Pot in
18 years, saying he had no doubt that the man on the mattress was Pol Pot and
dead.

            The emotional scars left by Pol Pot's terror reign are crystallized in a
remark made by a "Killing Fields" survivor, quoted by both the WP and
NYT : "If he's dead, hand over his body to the people....I want to see
him handcuffed and pushed into a jail, like his cadres did to me 20 years
ago."

            Both the Post and Times note that the U.S. is taking the
position that Pol Pot's death should not end efforts to bring to justice other
Khmer Rouge leaders implicated in the Cambodian slaughter. The WP lead
editorial states that eight to ten members of Pot's extermination committee are
still at large, and the NYT lead editorial says that the current head of
Cambodia, Hun Sen, is also a henchmen.

            The WP reports that the Republican National Committee's reaction to
Al Gore's disclosure of his tax return the other day was to label him "Vice
President Scrooge" for donating just $353 to charity last year out of his income
of $197,729.

            The Wall Street Journal reports that in the months leading up
to recent Judiciary Committee hearings on Microsoft, the Senate Democrats
campaign organization was given $200,000 worth of free software by competitor
Oracle.

            The NYT picks up today on a story first reported by the South
China Morning Post : Apple Computer, in bringing to Hong Kong its "Think
Different" ads featuring pictures of famous independent movers and shakers, has
decided to drop the Dalai Lama's portrait from the campaign. The
company at first tried to claim that this was because the Tibetan leader's face
is not well-known in the region--until confronted with the information that
polls show 80 percent of Hong Kong residents are familiar with him. Now the
line is, "In China, he may not get across the message that Apple is trying to
send." True, since apparently the message is money-grubbing phony
individualism.

            The NYT and LAT fronts report that a Vanderbilt University
study, to be published today in Science , indicates that blacks are far less likely than whites to make use of the
Internet. The racial divide is particularly pronounced on the lower end of
the economic scale. Among households making less than $40,000 a year, whites
were six times as likely as blacks to have used the Web. By the way, the
LAT story cannot just refer to the "World Wide Web"--oh no, it has to
explain that this is "a popular Internet graphical network, encompassing some
62 million Americans, that is revolutionizing business and education." Now
think about this--if a reader doesn't know what the Web is, would he know what
the Internet is, or what a graphical network is?

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Bank Shots

            The Washington Post and Los Angeles
Times lead with Monday's big merger announcements, and everybody has
lots of front-page and inside banking stories. The New York Times ,
which led with the mergers yesterday, goes with the looming high costs of the
midterm elections. USA Today goes with the mysterious breakdown experienced by
AT&T's "frame relay" data network, which is used by hundreds of
multinational companies to handle such tasks as central database access and
e-mail. The main effects the paper mentions are a reservations slowdown at
Northwest Airlines and travel agencies' difficulties getting credit card
authorizations.

            The WP lead reports that the company emerging from the
BankAmerica/NationsBank combine will command eight percent of all bank deposits
in the U.S., close to the ten percent limit currently mandated by federal law.
The Post notes however, that unlike last week's Citicorp/Travelers move,
which challenges Depression-era laws barring different types of financial
services from being offered by a single company, this bank merger is within the
boundaries of current law, because in 1994, Congress allowed coast-to-coast
banking. But, mentions the Wall Street Journal , Sen. Arlen Specter is contemplating
legislation that would raise the hurdles to Fed approval of big bank
mergers.

            The WP reports that many bank stocks soared on the merger news, while
the LAT identified more with customers and employees than shareholders,
going high in its story with concerns that the BankAmerica/NationsBank deal
would lead to higher fees and could eliminate 8,000 jobs. The NYT
doesn't get to that latter bit of unpleasantness until the fifteenth paragraph
of its bank story.

            The WP breaks out a separate story about what the deal means to customers, dominated by wiggle-claims
quoted from others like "bigger is not necessarily better when it comes to the
accounts of individual customers" and "bigger banks do tend to charge higher
fees." But USAT 's news section cover story on bank mergers says it
flat-out: "surveys show that big banks charge higher fees," and backs that
assertion up with several data bullets.

            A NYT op-ed makes the point that in light of these big bank
mergers, the government should reconsider the consequences if one of the new
monsters fails. Current law allows the government to completely protect
depositors and creditors of banks considered too big to let fail. This policy
ignores the lesson of the S and L crisis in the 1980s and of the current Asian
imbroglio: the promise of complete protection contributes to bank failures by
encouraging risky bank ventures. So, the piece argues, big account holders
should have to personally bear some of the loss that comes from a failure. That
would encourage them to monitor their banks more closely.

            The NYT lead says that the upcoming midterm elections are apt
to break spending records because candidates are buying television time far
earlier than ever before. The trend is being attributed to Bill Clinton's 1995
decision to mount an early and intense television campaign. Another influence
the paper cites is that of Steve Forbes, who became a major force in early
Republican primaries by spending tons of his own money on TV ads. It's become
obvious that politicians fear not having the campaign money far more than they
fear any scandal caused by raising it. The paper notes that Alfred Checchi, a
candidate for the Democratic nomination for Governor of California, began
buying television ads just before last Thanksgiving for the primary vote this
coming June. Checchi's standard, says the Times , promises to lead to the
most expensive state election in history.

            The WSJ "Work Week" column notes a simple position taken by the
National Association of Manufacturers that could encourage high school students
to take their classes more seriously: use high-school transcripts more in
hiring.

            The WP business section reports that a company that until now has
sold its language-understanding software to the intelligence community for
spy-detection is poised to sell a similar product designed to help the
government and brokerage firms monitor the offers and promises made by brokers
in communications with (potential) clients. The idea is that the program that
once could pick out the needle of a phrase like "covert operative" in a
haystack of e-mails has now been trained, says the paper, to do the same for
"opportunity of a lifetime" and "so safe even my mother has it." Forgive
"Today's Papers" for wondering--but how will this software catch brokers if it
couldn't catch Aldrich Ames?

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Lewinsky Outsky

            The New York Times ,
Washington Post , and Los Angeles
Times lead with the decision by the judge in the Paula Jones lawsuit to
exclude all evidence relating to Monica Lewinsky. USA Today
goes with the apparently floundering negotiations between Lewinsky's lawyers
and Kenneth Starr. All four fronts are adorned with a fresh picture of Ms.
Lewinsky, appearing far more sophisticated than in the previous head shot or
the CNN reel. No doubt about it, sitting chiaroscuro in the back of a limo next
to a criminal defense attorney is a good look.

            The Jones case ruling came, explain the papers, in response to Starr's even
broader request to halt all of the case's fact-finding in deference to Starr's
criminal investigation. The judge acknowledged that Lewinsky-related evidence
might be relevant, but says it's not essential. Jones' lawyers were
disappointed, being left in the position, observes the NYT , of not being
able to use evidence their case helped flush out. President Clinton's suits
liked the decision. "That's huge," said Robert Bennett in the WP . "That
means we try the Paula Jones case and not the Monica Lewinsky case. That's
huge, man." (The NYT has the same quote, but loses the "man.")

            Pace Hillary Clinton, the NYT points out that this legal conflict
between the Starr and Jones camps shows that there's not a united anti-Clinton
front.

            The LAT lead cites experts who argue that the decision has a big
pro-Clinton upshot: if the sworn statements Clinton and Lewinsky recently gave
to Jones' lawyers are not admissible, then they cannot be used as the basis for
perjury or obstruction of justice charges. The LAT notes that Starr's
office doesn't agree.

            The NYT story on the Lewinsky/Starr negotiations has
plenty of goodies. Such as: Tripp saying Thursday night that she was present
late one night when Clinton called Lewinsky, and that she had seen "numerous
gifts" the two exchanged. The story also states that FBI agents removed several
dresses and pant suits from Lewinsky's Watergate closet and that the FBI
laboratory has tested them to see if they could be linked to Clinton. The paper
does not know the tests' outcome.

            The WP , NYT , and USAT go front-page with the bombing
yesterday at an Alabama abortion clinic that killed an off-duty police officer
working there as a security guard. Operation Rescue reps joined pro-choice
advocates in condemning the action. Investigators are looking to see if the
crime has any connection to two unsolved 1997 Atlanta clinic bombings.

            The Wall Street Journal "Washington Wire" reminds us that
journalists can dish it out but they can't take it, with its report that Sidney
Blumenthal, who is suing Matt Drudge for slander, has, via his lawyers, blasted
NBC's Tim Russert for having Drudge on "Meet The Press" last weekend.

            The WP off-lead reports that the French foreign minister is
unexpectedly firm in his support of U.S. threats against Iraq. The new French
stance is also Page One at the LAT . Meanwhile, fully half of the
NYT op-ed page is given over to calls for action against Saddam. William
Kristol and Robert Kagan say that the U.S. should remove Hussein and his regime
from power. A.M. Rosenthal goes that one better: "Eventually he will have to be
killed for the safety of his own people and of the Middle East."

            The NYT reports that the Manhattan Deli added two sandwiches to its
menu Thursday: The "Bill Clinton" and the "Ken Starr." And on the first day at
least, the former outsold the latter. The sandwiches are identical concoctions
of ham, baloney, and turkey. With one difference: The "Clinton" uh, comes with
a tomato.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            The Kuwaiting Game

            
               USA
Today leads with the U.S. decision to move 3,000 additional troops into
Kuwait as part of its Iraq build-up. The Washington Post leads with a GOP Senate report's criticism
of Al Gore's apparent fund-raising appearance at a Buddhist temple during the
'96 campaign. The New York Times
goes with Monica Lewinsky's upcoming compelled appearance before a Washington
D.C. grand jury. And the Los Angeles Times leads with INS mistakes that may
have led to improper naturalized citizenship of more than six thousand
immigrants.

            
               USAT says the purpose of the fresh troops is to increase pressure on
Saddam Hussein, but also collaterally raises the question of how exactly that's
supposed to work, since the paper also states there is no intention to use
those soldiers or those already in Kuwait for "offensive action" against Iraq.
That will be done, says USAT , from the air. (Just a hunch, but look for
an opening move that's more commandoey than what Saddam's reading about in the
U.S. dailies. Very possibly one that will achieve the same results as an
assassination without itself being banned by U.S. policy because the operation
wasn't designed to be one--wink, wink, nudge, nudge.) USAT 's lead
includes a quote from a fighter pilot that nicely distills G.I. geopolitics:
"We're all a little itchy. We'd kind of like to do something.''

            The troop move is in the front-page news box at the Wall Street Journal , on the WP and LAT
fronts, and inside at the NYT .

            The WP lead, concerning the report by Senate Republicans
on Al Gore's participation at a Buddhist temple fund-raiser, is in the same
mold as last Sunday's NYT lead--a summary of facts already unearthed
during the Thompson hearings, with nothing really new. The Post 's
adjacent piece suggests that the report's finding concerning alleged
connections between Clinton money operatives and Chinese intelligence officials
is in the same limbo. A similar bit of warmed-over material--about an audience
with Clinton apparently granted in exchange for a $325,000 campaign
contribution--graces the LAT front.

            The NYT explains that now that Monica Lewinsky's negotiations with
Kenneth Starr seem to have stalled out, she has been summoned to appear before Starr's D.C. grand jury on Thursday. The
paper calls the move "a significant escalation."

            In discussing how when word leaked about Lewinsky, it put an end to any
undercover usefulness she might have had, the NYT writes, "The next day,
word of her alleged affair with the president began seeping out on an Internet
gossip site.." The Times , in other words, still can't bear to breathe
the words "Matt Drudge" as a source of news. This is as absurd and snobbish as
if NBC News were to report on a story that originally was broken by a
"newspaper with offices on 43rd St."

            The NYT 's Keith Bradsher has pretty much owned the topic of the
dangers presented to normal-sized cars by sports utility vehicles, and today
Bradsher continues, writing about an auto insurance industry report that urges auto makers to
redesign SUVs because they "increase the risk of death for other road users
while providing little if any additional protection for their own occupants."
The WSJ sees things pretty much the same way, going high
with the report's claim that people in cars hit broadside by SUVs are 27 times
more likely to die as the SUVs occupants. But the WP in its SUV piece says the report is more nuanced,
suggesting that the problem lies not just with the size of the SUVs but also
with the lack of protective features in small cars.

            On the top of the NYT national edition is a picture of Secretary of
Defense William Cohen on the ground in Kuwait that is interesting because it's
the rare shot of an American politician doing something the rest of us do all
the time: wear sunglasses. The picture helps drive home the basis for the
taboo: Behind those Foster Grants Cohen looks every bit the kind of oleaginous
pol the Godfather has to eventually help out of some little unpleasantness in
Vegas.

            The WP runs a story on its front about the recent discovery that a
much-ticketed truck-driver "whose license was revoked after a crash in August
killed a teenage motorist...." was caught driving again. And atop the story
sits the headline: "Driver of Truck That Killed Teen is Cited with New
Violation." Besides having previously received thirty-two traffic citations,
the driver precipitated the fatality by running a red light. So, it may seem a
little thing, but imbued with the Orwellian desire to combat imprecise language
that makes lies sound truthful and murder respectable, "Today's Papers" would
urge the WP to rewrite such stories thus: "...whose license was revoked
after he crashed into a car, killing a teenage motorist...." And to put it
under a headline like: "Driver of Truck Who Killed Teen is Cited With New
Violation."

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Kofi Break?

            The late Sunday movement in the Iraq crisis is everybody's lead. USA Today
says that U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan will arrive in New York today from
Baghdad, bringing with him an agreement that may avert a second Gulf War. The
Los
Angeles Times reports the breakthrough came via a dramatic, three-hour
bargaining session between Annan and Saddam Hussein. The Washington Post says Annan will present the document he and
Hussein already signed Monday (Baghdad time) to the Security Council in New
York on Tuesday. Written details were not available at press time (and
USAT notes that U.S. officials aren't sure that Annan could speak
frankly about it to anyone while he remained in Iraq where phone lines are not
secure), but the dailies are reporting that Hussein has agreed to open his
presidential palaces to U.N. weapons inspectors--the sticking point that has
brought the U.S. to the brink of warfare. More than the other papers, the
New York Times
emphasizes that much seems to remain unresolved for the moment--the number of
sites covered may actually be limited, it reports.

            According to the coverage, the newly brokered agreement lacks something the
Iraqis had previously insisted on--a time limit on inspections of the
presidential locations. And in return, the U.N. agrees to provide diplomats
from various countries who would accompany the weapons inspectors. Even if the
Security Council approves the deal, notes the WP , Washington has
reserved the right to bomb Iraq. And White House spokesman Mike McCurry is
widely quoted as noncommittal. But, says the Post , Annan is confident
that all members of the Council, including the U.S., will accept the deal. One
administration concern the Post passes along: that Annan may not have
insisted on the right of inspectors to make repeat visits to the presidential
palaces.

            The NYT emphasizes that the agreement apparently does not address the
issue of other presidential properties not on Baghdad's list of eight. The
Times national edition reports that "some diplomats say" that in only a
matter of weeks inspectors could run into access problems at other sites. The
NYT metro edition is bolder: "The agreement
apparently does not address the issue of other presidential properties not
among the eight listed by Baghdad." The USAT front
section cover story">USAT front section cover story is plainer
still: "The problem is that over the years, Saddam has also agreed to many
things on which he has not followed through."

            
               USAT goes front-page with the news from Sunday morning chat show
appearances made by Monica Lewinsky's attorney, William Ginsburg, that she
"absolutely" stands by her affidavit in which she denied having sex with
President Clinton. Only USAT sees this as big news. The other fronts
pass, perhaps because, as USAT notes, Ginsburg has said almost as much
before.

            The Wall Street Journal waited until the day after Desert Storm
opened fire to run its profile of Norman Schwarzkopf. Today, it does a little
better in running an interesting Thomas Ricks profile of the current Iraqi
operation's top dog, Gen. Anthony Zinni. It seems to "Today's Papers" that such
men should get at least as much advance press attention as second-tier
presidential candidates do. (How many column inches, for instance, did the
Journal spill on Alan Keyes?) The piece has the good detail that when
Zinni headed up peacekeeping efforts in Somalia, he met regularly with local
cartoonists, who he discovered, had inordinate influence on the largely
illiterate local populace. The piece's only real false-step: describing the
Marine Corps' ideal officer as a "knuckle-dragging intellectual." Would the
Journal ever call a CEO that?

            A front-page NYT piece notes the trend towards Internet-aided prostitution operations. TP doesn't know the
NYT policy regarding the giving of Web addresses in news stories, but
notes that in this one, the address for a Chelsea-based sex service
clearinghouse called "Redlightnet.com" is not issued. But what's the point of
withholding this, since a Web search of that handle will quickly turn up a
URL?

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Anti-Pap, Anti-Iraq

            
               USA
Today leads with mounting criticism of Kenneth Starr, mincing no words
in referring to "his probe into President Clinton's sex life." The Washington Post leads with the rise in doctors' disability
insurance claims. The Los Angeles Times goes with the Clinton administration's
desire to drop the annual process of certifying that Mexico and other nations
are cooperating in the drug war in favor of setting up an international
anti-drug alliance that such countries would join. The New York Times
lead states that the "consumer" health-care laws (the scare-quotes are supplied
by the Times ) being discussed in state capitals tend to focus more on
protecting "the incomes, jobs and turf of the health-care system's biggest and
richest vested interests," namely, specialist physicians and managed-care
plans.

            Doctors used to be among the most dependable workers in America, but
according to the WP , they've been leaving their jobs to collect disability benefits in such high numbers that
insurers now view them as in the same claim risk echelon as grocery cashiers
and bank tellers, and even riskier than shipping clerks and traveling salesmen.
Not to mention far below lawyers, accountants and engineers. The most likely
explanation: stress and unhappiness brought on by the widespread advent of
managed care. As a result, disability premiums for docs are up big-time: one
big insurer is charging nearly 25 percent more than just last summer.

            
               USAT 's off-lead states that "the Clinton administration began making
the case for military action against Iraq to a U.S. audience Sunday.." That
"began" is a little unfair, isn't it? The paper goes on to point out that
Congress, which began a week's recess Friday, left without passing a resolution
authorizing force. Isn't this a rather telling demonstration of Congress'
priorities? Hmmm...what should I do: Decide on whether or not to go to war
or...take a vacation?
            

            The NYT front discusses some of the events that could affect the
timing of any military action against Iraq. Chief among them: moon
phases (stealth aircraft are easier to eyeball under a full moon), Parents'
Weekend at Stanford (President Clinton and Hillary are scheduled to go, and
that's not the best place to conduct a war from), and the Olympics (there's an
international convention that nations refrain from war during the Games).

            
               USAT reports that, as part of his pitch on a Sunday "This Week" shot,
Secretary of Defense Cohen showed a photo of a Kurdish woman and child killed
by Iraqi chemical weapons. Yet a front-page piece by LAT Middle East
expert Robin Wright states that in the eyes of some U.S. intelligence experts,
the U.S. knew the intelligence it supplied to Iraq in the 80s (during its war
with Iran) would be used to develop chemical weapons plans.

            The LAT front also brings word of anti-paparazzi legislation about to be introduced by Sen. Dianne
Feinstein. The "Personal Privacy Protection Act" (it sounded better than the
"Alec Baldwin Should Be Able To Punch Out Photographers" Act) would, says the
paper, preserve the right to photograph celebrities in public, but would crack
down on actions that could jeopardize safety. This is a fine example of what
Slate deputy editor Jack Shafer has called a therapeutic law: it
accomplishes nothing, except perhaps to make us feel good via the illusion of
accomplishing something. Really, how many examples are there of paparazzi
endangering (as opposed to merely inconveniencing) celebrities? Princess
Di's death turned out not to be one--it was drunk driving. The LAT lead
mentions a mob of photographers outside Monica's house waiting for a glimpse,
but again, where's the safety issue there? The paper also mentions Arnold
Schwarzenegger and Maria Shriver being cut off in traffic by videographers, but
that just gets at the redundancy of the law: reckless driving is already
against the law, as is trespassing on somebody's doorstep. "Today's Papers"
suspects that Sen. Feinstein gets all this, but can also do the math: a bill
protecting the rights of Arnold and Alec means serious donations.

            Saddam's complaint that has led to the current impasse is that the U.N.
weapons inspectors are U.S. spies. And yet on the WP 's front, R. Jeffrey
Smith makes the point that if U.S. military planners do attack Iraq, they will
be drawing in part on data about Iraqi capabilities and targets collected by the U.N. teams.

            On Sunday, the NYT used the Bill-Gates-pie-in-the-face incident as a
springboard for a "Week in Review" thumbsucker about the history of food as a
weapon. It wasn't enough to have the de rigeur mention of James Cagney
grapefruiting Mae Clark. There were also references to the Peloponnesian war,
the Irish Rebellion, Bismarck, and the siege of Leningrad. But most special,
however, was this passage: "A pie in the face, it's Soupy Sales stuff," said
Andrew Smith, who teaches culinary history at the New School for Social
Research."

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Gone Fission

            USA
Today, the Washington Post, and the New York
Times all lead with India's surprise nuclear tests, which are also the
subject of a lengthy WSJ front-page leader. The Los Angeles Times
puts this development just above the fold, but leads with the California
Supreme Court's ruling upholding the admissibility of DNA evidence, provided
prosecutors show that correct procedures were used.

            The NYT and WP note that Indian Prime Minister Atal Bihari
Vajpayee, who announced the tests yesterday, came to power two months ago as
the head of a Hindu nationalist party that has advocated the embrace of nuclear
weaponry as a vehicle for achieving great-power status. The Times
reports that basically, within India the tests met with neither political
dissent nor Gandhian pacifism.

            Most everywhere else was different. The papers report that President Clinton
was "deeply distressed" (but, says USAT , he will still make his planned
trip to India and Pakistan later this year). Japan, Australia and New Zealand
condemned the tests, report the papers, and Japan--India's largest foreign aid
source--and the U.S. are considering suspending aid to the country. Although
the amount of direct U.S. aid is minuscule, the Times and Journal
explain that the Clinton administration is considering invoking a 1994 federal
law that would, besides cutting off aid, also bar billions in American bank
loans and World Bank and IMF aid. The NYT adds Britain and Germany to
the ranks of those not amused.

            And there was Pakistan, whose Foreign Minister Ayub Khan responded, reports
the NYT , by hinting that his country would consider conducting its own
nuclear tests. The papers all note the widespread fear that the tests could
signify heightened tensions between India and Pakistan and even a nuclear arms
race between the two countries. Neither country, the papers note, has signed
the treaties that constrain nuclear tests. Most of the papers observe that many
Indians feel the tests were really designed to send a message to China,
especially, as the Times , the WP , and the Journal report,
since the Indian Defense Minister said just last week that China, not Pakistan,
is India's "potential enemy number one."

            The Times nicely captures the bizarre scene of the Indian
announcement, in which Vajpayee ignored the likely geo-political shockwaves and
spoke instead of measured yields and expected values and offered his warm
congratulations to the scientists and engineers responsible. The NYT and
Post observe that one of the three tests was of a thermonuclear device.
The Post reminds the reader that is a hydrogen bomb. The Times
and WP say that despite spy satellites, the Indian tests seemed to have
caught the U.S. and the other established members of the nuclear club by
surprise.

            Everybody's off-lead is Janet Reno's decision to seek the appointment of an
independent counsel to investigate allegations that Labor Secretary Alexis Herman peddled influence and was
involved in an illegal campaign contribution scheme. This is the seventh time
Reno has asked for an independent counsel. The NYT editorial page wishes
Reno's sensitivity to conflicts of interest and campaign fund-raising
improprieties extended to "the broader and more important matter of the 1996
presidential fund-raising scandals." A Wall Street Journal editorial, "Democrats and Coverups," makes the
same point.

            The LAT front says there's a limit to how big these mega-mergers can
get: $250 billion. That's how much, the paper figures, it would cost for
General Electric, the nation's largest company, to buy Microsoft, the second
largest.

            Buried fairly deep inside the metro edition of the NYT is a very
brief item reporting that a defense contractor was sentenced in a procurement
case. What did he do? He sold defective parts for the cable system used to
catch U.S. Navy planes as they land on aircraft carriers. When these cables
fail, aircrews plunge to watery graves and flight deck personnel quite
literally get cut in half. What was the executive's sentence? Three months in
federal prison (Club Fed, no doubt) and three months of house arrest. Do you
think that punishment fits that crime? Another question: It's bad enough that
the law tends to downplay these cases, but why don't the papers make more of
being willing to kill service members to make a profit? Maybe it's because
they're too into profit and not enough into service members.

            Incidentally that WSJ editorial "Democrats and Coverups" makes the
slyest reference yet to the Monica problem. The piece is ostensibly about
Whitewater and the Web Hubbell tapes and the House Democratic counteroffensive
vs. Rep. Dan Burton. But it includes this: "Now, we don't doubt that it's
possible to wave all this away as partisan tit for tat. Problem is, serious
Democrats know that this scandal is about a lot more than tat."

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            University Admitting Mistakes?

            The Los
Angeles Times and New York Times
lead with the University of California's disclosure that as a result of
Proposition 209's mandate to abandon affirmative action in admissions, the new
freshman classes at its two most selective schools, Berkeley and UCLA, will
have far fewer minority students than in the recent past. The Washington Post goes with the Supreme Court's decision
allowing states to ban the courtroom use of polygraph results. USA Today
leads with news that might be heartening for many users of the now withdrawn
diet concoction Redux: a new study suggests that short-term use of the drug is
not associated with an increase in heart valve problems. But the paper goes on
to note that the study was sponsored by Redux's manufacturer and does not in
any case address the consequences of long-term use.

            The University of California admissions situation is relayed most
frantically at the LAT , which states that "the number of African Americans
accepted by UC Berkeley has plunged 66% and the number admitted to UCLA dropped
43%," without stating most of the raw numbers behind the percentages. (A common
journalistic mistake/trick.) The WP does use the raw numbers when
reporting on Berkeley, but unaccountably goes back to emphasizing percentages
when discussing UCLA. The NYT also shies away from the actual numbers of
students involved, but at least emphasizes the before-and-after-209 minority
percentages of the total admitted pool, an illuminating datum. Both the
LAT and NYT report that the minority drop occurred despite the
university's decision to give extra consideration to poor applicants, thus
proving that in California at least, class isn't race.

            One university official is quoted by the LAT as seeing in the shift
the message that California's secondary schools must improve, while the paper
has Prop. 209 architect Ward Connerly saying it means some of the burden for
admissions must be put back on black and Latino families and the students
themselves. A more striking Connerly quote somehow doesn't make the cut at
either Times , but is in the WP and USAT : "These numbers
will finally and conclusively put to rest the lie that we've heard for so long
from these campuses that race is only one factor in how they choose
students..It's the decisive factor." (The WP should have, by the way,
changed the present tense in that last sentence to the past, which was clearly
Connerly's meaning. USAT gets this right.)

            Some questions: Why does the NYT headline only mention the drop in
black admissions and relegate the drop for Hispanics to the subhead? Why don't
any of the stories mention the graduation rates for blacks and Hispanics
at the two schools under the old regime?

            The Wall Street Journal spills a lot of ink on tobacco, with
pieces about trial lawyers' pursuit of anti-tobacco cases, the attempt by the
anti-asbestos lobby to tap into any settlement deal, and the political spin on
the pending Senate bill. The "Capitol Journal" column paints a picture of a
bill in "deep peril," and of a sharply divided Senate besieged by an "enraged"
tobacco industry. In the end, says the paper, it may fall to one man to bring
order out of this chaos--Bill Clinton.

            Both the LAT and NYT go front-page with the news that an
eleven-year-old girl, Emily Rosa, did research for a science fair two years ago as a
fourth-grader that is being published today in the prestigious Journal of the
American Medical Association. Her project was a refreshingly simple experiment
that showed "therapeutic touch" practitioners don't have a special ability to
detect an energy field around human bodies. One question: why does the NYT say she showed that the healers detected a human
hand they couldn't see at a rate "no better than chance" would have predicted,
when her results show they scored only 44 percent, which is 6 percent
worse?

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            IMF-up

            Everybody leads with the worsening violence in Jakarta, Indonesia. The
New York
Times and Washington Post top fronts feature a dramatic picture of
protesters hauling away a man reportedly shot by police. The Los Angeles Times
front goes with looters carrying their plunder by a blazing overturned car.
President Suharto, who had been in Egypt, returned to the riot-riddled capital
and called out tanks and thousands of troops in an attempt to restore order and
maintain his 32-year control of the country.

            With the riot toll now standing at 24 dead (most shot, some trapped in
burning buildings), the U.S. warned Americans not to travel to Indonesia. The
LAT reports that up to 3,000 Americans are already in Jakarta, with
about 12,000 more in outlying areas. The WP and NYT both capture
the growing political nuance of the street-level situation with their
observations that some army troops were greeted with applause by rioters, and
that the soldiers, unlike the cops, mingled with the crowds. The military might
just, the papers make clear, tip the scales against Suharto.

            Despite some strong descriptions of events, all the papers could have done a
better job of explaining them. USA Today, for instance, waits until the twelfth paragraph
of its fifteen paragraph story to inform the reader that the unrest was about
rising prices caused by Suharto's introduction of new IMF-dictated austerity
measures. The WP holds that information until paragraph eighteen. The
NYT delays until paragraph seventeen mention of rising unemployment and
economic-based resentment of Chinese Indonesians. The LAT gets the
poverty and anti-Chinese angles, however lightly, into its first two
paragraphs.

            The Wall Street Journal reports that Indonesian students have relied
heavily on e-mail and cell phones to organize their protests. And although the
phone companies deny it, says the paper, the protesters believe their cell
calls are sometimes blocked to obstruct their planning.

            The NYT has a top-front exclusive: that Democratic Party fund-raiser
Johnny Chung has provided federal investigators with their first solid link
between the Chinese government and questionable donations made to the DNC
during the last presidential campaign. According to the Times , Chung now
says a large part of the nearly $100,000 he gave to the DNC in the summer of
1996 came from a Chinese woman aerospace executive/army officer whose father
was at the time China's top military commander and a member of the Communist
Party leadership. At the time, notes the paper, President Clinton was
facilitating the Chinese launch of American civilian communications satellites.
A White House spokesman, Jim Kennedy, is quoted in the piece saying, "We had no
knowledge about the source of Chung's money..."

            Everybody's front runs the news that Microsoft yesterday made a surprise
last-minute move to avoid antitrust lawsuits by agreeing to delay its release
of Windows 98 while it enters settlement talks with the government. The talks
start today and the shipments are delayed until at least Monday. It's clear
that government officials feel they're in the driver's seat now: one tells the
Post , "We're not going to be locked in the room to be shown baby
pictures of Bill Gates."

            The WP and NYT fronts report on the deaths of nine
Palestinians in West Bank protests marking Israel's fiftieth anniversary.
Israeli troops opened fire on Palestinians moving towards Jewish settlements.
Two of the dead were 8-year-old boys.

            The WP runs an AP story saying that Susan McDougal is prepared to
testify at her obstruction of justice trial about Bill Clinton's truthfulness
regarding Whitewater matters. The dispatch mentions that McDougal arrived at
her plea appearance in a prison jumpsuit and handcuffs. Television footage
shows that the cuffs were manacled to a belly chain as well. "Today's Papers"
has never seen any reporting about why Ms. McDougal, neither a violent offender
nor a documented flight risk, must be trussed about like this. Some paper
should find out: Is this really be an inflexible policy, or is it blatant
message-sending by Kenneth Starr?

            The WP reports that the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration's stats for 1997 are in. Notable numbers: Drunken driving
deaths--16,520--fell to their lowest level in twenty years. The total number of
fatalities was 42,000, 65 fewer than in 1996. (Wonder how many years have had a
number of deaths ending in three zeros.) And 63 percent of those killed in car
crashes were not wearing seat belts.

            Another AP item in the Post reports that at her weekly news
conference, Janet Reno admitted she has become so confused over the computer
system in her office that she has forsaken it for paper and pencil. "Today's
Papers" is astounded that not one reporter in attendance ventured to ask if the
Attorney General had tried installing a different browser.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Case: Dissed Miss

            The surprising dismissal of Paula Jones' lawsuit leads all around, with the
Los
Angeles Times and Washington Post going with full banner headlines. Federal
judge Susan Webber Wright ruled that although Bill Clinton's conduct may have
been "boorish and offensive," it was brief, and isolated and didn't result in
physical harm. Therefore, it wasn't, she concluded, under even the most
charitable reading of the record, a sexual assault or workplace harassment. The
New York Times
notes that Wright gave no credit to Jones' claim of suffering "sexual aversion"
as a result of her run-in with Clinton. The papers all note that the judge
dismissed as irrelevant in a few sentences all the Jones allegations of a
Clinton pattern of extramarital sex. Jones' lawyers intend to appeal. Ken Starr
responded to the news by promising to soldier on. The ruling, he tells USA Today ,
"has no effect on our authority."

            The WP makes the point that this is not obvious, observing that any
perjury or obstruction of justice charges against Clinton would be based on his
conduct in a now-dead case.

            The reaction of the other principals is widely reported: Clinton asked if
the unexpected good news was an April Fools' joke. Jones got the news on her
car phone and pulled over and cried. The Post says officials at the
White House and with the president in Africa maintained a "consciously subdued
tone," but the LAT reports staff cheers and laughter, and the NYT
finds President Clinton walking around his Dakar, Senegal hotel suite with a
cigar in his mouth and a drum in his hands (to be replaced moments later with a
guitar.)

            The political impact is also generally viewed as pro-Clinton. House
Republicans, says the LAT , may now be wary of moving aggressively
against Clinton. The NYT says it even stronger: "It is now politically inconceivable that Congress will consider
impeachment."

            But, adds the NYT , despite the trial outcome, "the president and the
presidency appear to have been diminished in important and lasting ways." A
front-page WP piece says the Jones lawsuit "has had an indelible impact
on the American political system and on other institutions in American life."
And the LAT lead editorial sees the development as a "bittersweet
victory for the president." Perhaps, the editorial continues, "it is possible
to envision a time when Social Security reform and other urgent issues might
capture the attention of the nation and be at the top of the congressional
agenda. When the debate over health care returns to the spotlight. When the
details of the tobacco settlement become a matter of wide public discussion.
But...the world's suspicions about his truthfulness in many things will dog his
place in history." The scandal, says the LAT has made the president seem
"coated in slime."

            A Wall Street Journal front-page feature reports that
the rich have, somewhat surprisingly, not been able to shelter their income
from the higher taxes ushered in by George Bush (1990) and Bill Clinton (1993).
Indeed, says the Journal , upper income tax revenues are a big reason the
federal deficit has vanished. Nowadays the top 5 percent of American families
in earnings are paying about 32 percent of their income in taxes, compared to
about 26.7 percent ten years ago.

            A piece inside the WP (about an article coming out today in the
scientific journal Nature ) reports that a New York scientist, Stuart
Newman, has applied for a patent for a way of mixing human embryo cells
with those from a monkey, ape or other animal. His goal: to set off a
debate about the morality of patenting life forms, which Newman is opposed to.
Currently, explains the Post , patents are not allowed on human beings
(based on the 13th Amendment's proscription of slavery), but the issue of
hybrids is unsettled, because patent law has not addressed "how human" an
animal would have to be before it fell under the ban.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Peace Annan?

            The ongoing U.S. assessment of the U.N.-brokered Iraq deal leads at USAT and
the WP. The national edition of the NYT goes with a Senate vote that keeps
alive a campaign fund-raising reform bill (the metro edition of the
Times goes with a state court decision that gives New York City the
right to kick topless joints and sex shops out of Times Square). The LAT lead
is El Nino rainstorms that have killed six in California, while the paper's
off-lead is the news that Kenneth Starr will prosecute White House officials if
he believes they have spread false information about his staff. The stance,
says the paper, amounts to an escalation of the confrontation with the Clinton
administration to "frenetic proportions."

            
               USAT reports that the U.N. Security Council delayed voting on the
Iraq agreement after pressing Secretary-General Kofi Annan on several points.
The big unresolved issues, says the paper: the role of the diplomats who would
now accompany weapons inspectors on their rounds, the inspectors' chain of
command now, and whether or not the agreement's nod to respecting Iraqi
sovereignty could interfere with inspections. The WP says the U.S. fears
the new inspection organization will be more susceptible than its predecessor
to outside political pressures. In response, says the Post , Annan
telephoned President Clinton yesterday, reassuring him that inspections will
remain controlled by technical experts.

            The WP also reports that the U.S. wants the U.N. resolution to
automatically declare Iraq in breach of the agreement if it resumes its
obstructive ways. The WP runs the text of the deal signed by Annan and
Hussein, and the language is surprisingly clear. "Today's Papers" has had
apartment leases that were harder to follow--and longer.

            The NYT front runs a nice piece of access journalism detailing how
President Clinton, and his top national security aides, especially Madeleine
Albright, contributed to the ultimate details of the Annan/Hussein deal. At one
point, apparently, Al Gore suggested that the administration consider
designating Saddam a war criminal. According to the paper, Washington was far
more actively involved in planning Annan's approach than has been previously
acknowledged.

            But the biggest NYT story is that President Clinton has decided to
have his closest aides cite executive privilege to keep from testifying to the
Starr grand jury about internal White House discussions on the Monica L.
matter. The notion could be put to a test before a federal judge as early as
this week.

            The WSJ reports that the Justice Department has decided to fight Starr's
efforts to obtain testimony from presidential bodyguards. The decision was
forged, says the Journal , after the Secret Service director, in arguing
that efficient protection requires agent proximity and hence agent
confidentiality, made a presentation at the DOJ that included a slow-motion
videotape of a Secret Service agent taking a bullet intended for Ronald Reagan
in 1981.

            Some editorial writers weigh in today on the escalating battle between
Clinton and Starr. The WP lead editorial says Starr "absurdly"
subpoenaed White House aide Sidney Blumenthal, and assesses the White House
strategy of "looking for dirt on prosecutors and trying to discredit
straightforward reporting of embarrassing facts" as "sleazy." The NYT
lead editorial views Starr's move on Blumenthal as "bone stupid" tactically and
an "attack on press freedom and the unrestricted flow of information."

            The NYT reports that "robust investment returns coupled with strong
donations to higher education have created a financial boom for American
colleges and universities, 25 of which now have endowments of $1 billion or
more." The piece goes on to quote various breathless university officials about
how the money is rolling in, but nowhere is the question raised as to why if
financial times are so good, tuition has risen at a ferocious rate, often
outpacing even health care costs.

            The NYT front includes a Gina Kolata piece describing the rapidly
escalating cost of donor eggs for various infertility procedures. One New
Jersey clinic has just doubled payments to donors, offering $5,000 for a
month's worth of eggs. The paper notes that sperm donors typically get less
than $100, but also describes in some detail how much less fun egg donors
have.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Mergers and Inquisitions

            The New York Times
leads with two new major financial company mergers, with the bigger of the two
deals also flagged by the Wall Street Journal in its front-page news box. The
Washington Post goes with the confusing picture
