
   
   
      
         
            Annan-omous Threat

            
               USA
Today , the Washington Post , and the New York Times
lead with the U.N. Security Council's OK of the weapons inspection deal agreed
to last week by Kofi Annan and Saddam Hussein. The Los Angeles
Times goes with President Clinton's criticism of the congressional
movement towards a radical overhaul of the tax code.

            The Security Council voted 15-0 to approve the Annan deal, which opens up
eight of Saddam's presidential sites to U.N. inspectors. The papers report that
debate focused mainly on what would happen if Saddam reneges. The U.S. and
Britain wanted the Council to authorize automatic military action as part of
the accord, while other member countries, led by France, Russia, and China, did
not. In the end, there was no mention of automatic military moves, but merely a
warning of "the severest consequences." USAT and the WP stress
the U.N.'s warning, while the NYT stresses the U.S. failure to get
inclusion of an automatic attack. Despite this difference, everybody reports
that the U.S. position is that it doesn't need further approval for a strike if
the deal is abrogated.

            The Post reports that the U.N.'s resolution reiterates the intention
to consider ending the economic sanctions on Iraq once its weapons of mass
destruction have been eliminated. This news seems too important to leave to the
last paragraph, though.

            The LAT lead reports on a speech President Clinton gave Monday
in which he denounced the current vogue for wiping out the U.S. tax code in
favor of a radically new system. Clinton called the approach "misguided,
reckless and irresponsible," warning that it could imperil the economy. "No one
concerned about fighting crime would even think about saying, 'Well, three
years from now we're going to throw out the criminal code and we'll figure out
what to put in its place,'" the paper quotes Clinton as saying. "But that is
exactly what some people in Congress are proposing to do."

            This sounds like an important story--Zeitgeist and president on collision
course over taxes. Why then does the WP put it on p. 5, and the
NYT national edition bury it on p. 15?

            A Wall Street Journal editorial on Internet taxation
takes the position that Bill Clinton is right to support a sales tax
moratorium, and Trent Lott wrong to oppose it, because the Internet is "the
business infrastructure of the future," and hence its growth shouldn't be
"stifled" by taxes. Along the way, the editorial asks a fun tax question: "If a
man in California buys a birthday present for his mother in Illinois from a
company located in Georgia, in which state did the transaction take place?"

            Today's appearance of Vernon Jordan before the Starr grand jury gets
front-page coverage at the WP and a "Politics and Policy" piece at the
WSJ . USAT uses the occasion to do an informative
front-page primer on grand juries. The Tony Mauro/Kevin Johnson effort
reviews such basics as that the lawyers of those summoned have to wait outside
and that grand jurors can pose questions. There are also the nuggets that
England did away with grand juries fifty years ago and that in Hawaii they have
their own lawyer as a counterbalance to the prosecutor. And there's this grand
juror's question to Sidney Blumenthal during his appearance last week: "Do you
believe the public should be fully informed about the character of the
president?" Blumenthal's answer: "Yes, I do."

            In a WP front-page interview, Bill Gates says, referring
to the Justice Department's lawsuit, "If we can't innovate in our products,
then you know we will be replaced." The paper is struck by how far Gates'
behavior is from "the usual cautious demeanor of business leaders visiting
Washington," and finds him "roaring with indignation and disdain for those who
question his business practices."

            One of the key causes of press overkill of the sort we're now witnessing in
l'affaire Lewinsky is the papers' tendencies to do stories about
anything that has to do with Topic A, even if it would otherwise merit
virtually no news play. A good example is found in today's LAT "Column One" feature, which tells us that Walt Whitman,
"the poet of democracy, the poet of the body and soul," commands a loyal and
expansive following, and quotes a talking head from USC to drive home the
point. The real reason for the piece isn't revealed until the fifth paragraph:
Whitman's book Leaves of Grass "has a cameo in the investigation
involving President Clinton and former White House intern Monica Lewinsky."
What's next--a "Column One" about Leo Rosten and the history of "schmucko"?

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Genocide Chat

            The New York Times ,
Washington Post , and Los Angeles
Times lead with President Clinton's remark that the United States
should have done something quickly about the 1994 killings of half a million
people in Rwanda and having failed to do so, must share in the blame for them.
USA
Today goes with the developing story of the Arkansas schoolyard
shootings, which also gets a lot of coverage on the other fronts.

            Clinton's acknowledgement came during an emotionally charged stop at the
Kigali airport during which he and Hillary listened to the wrenching
recollections of massacre survivors. Given the prior day's discussion of the
wrongs of slavery, Clinton's remarks about the Rwandan genocide indicate, says
the WP , that his African sojourn is becoming a "contrition tour." But, points out the Post ,
yesterday's statement was different--with it, Clinton is referring to an
episode that occurred during his own administration. The paper points out that
Clinton suggested yesterday that one obstacle to taking action at the time was
a lack of credible information about what was actually going on. The paper also
notes that some human rights activists responded that there was ample reliable
information, just not ample White House will.

            The NYT reports that in his mea culpa du jour, Clinton also cited Bosnia as another example on his watch where the reaction to
ethnic killing was too slow. The Times does a good job of supplying
specifics on the U.S. inaction in Rwanda, noting that the Clinton
administration blocked a UN on-the-ground effort that "might have saved
hundreds of thousands of lives."

            Both the NYT and USAT Clinton-on-Rwanda pieces note a
political factor that at the time inhibited U.S. action, but which Clinton
didn't mention: Public support for U.S. involvement in peacekeeping missions
evaporated just prior to the Rwanda situation when 18 U.S. soldiers were killed
in an ambush in Somalia.

            The headline over the LAT 's Rwanda coverage is not a good model.
"Rwandans Told World Shares Guilt for Genocide" doesn't mention by whom, a
particularly oversight when the whom is the prez.

            The USAT lead states that the two Arkansas suspects--age 13 and
11--will be tried as juveniles. The NYT says their extreme youth means
conviction might result in sentences of just a few years. The LAT front
carries a piece about a new category of criminal suggested by such cases--the
"fledgling psychopath."

            A NYT op-ed says the incident implicates the too-ready access
young people have to guns. (They were apparently stolen from one of the boys'
grandfathers, but, notes the Times , in Arkansas it is perfectly legal
for an 11-year-old to own a rifle or shotgun.) And a WP editorial
reports, "The overall firearm-related death rate among U.S. children aged less
than 15 was nearly 12 times higher than among children in the other 25
industrialized countries combined."

            According to the Wall Street Journal , Jesse Jackson, who is accompanying
President Clinton on his African trip in his role as special envoy to Africa,
may have found his niche. Some in the foreign policy community, says the
Journal , which on the whole was wary of his appointment, already feel
Jackson is proving useful. For instance, on the current trip Clinton followed
Jackson's advice and had a lengthy phone conversation with the president of
Liberia to make sure he didn't feel snubbed because Clinton wasn't visiting his
country.

            Back to the Arkansas shootings for a sec: The papers, having learned the
suspects' names from school sources, opt to use them rather than invoking the
usual juvenile court practice of anonymity. "Today's Papers" would be
interested in finding out the general policy of the papers on such matters: Do
they print the names of juveniles whenever they learn them? Or only when the
crimes they're charged with are very serious?

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Electoral Collage

            The Washington Post goes with Kenneth Starr's request that the
Supreme Court bypass the ordinary appeals court process and directly decide on
an emergency basis whether President Clinton's White House lawyers and Secret
Service agents can be compelled to testify in the Monica Lewinsky
investigation. Primary election results lead at USA Today and
the metro edition of the New York
Times . The national edition of the NYT and the early edition of
the Los
Angeles Times lead with the decision by Merrill Lynch to pay a $400
million settlement for its role in the bankruptcy of California's Orange
County, but later LAT editions focus on California's primary
results.

            Much of the primary coverage centers on two California ballot initiatives:
the one calling for an end to the state's bilingual education program passed
(despite the opposition of all the major gubernatorial candidates, the PTA and
President Clinton). The one requiring unions to have their members individually
approve political uses of their dues will probably be defeated, albeit in a
fairly close vote. The NYT says the success of the anti-bilingualism
measure will pave the way for similar "assaults" on other such programs around
the country. (An interesting word-choice, illustrative of how in even the best
edited newspaper in the country, editorial tendencies can creep into a news
story. Would the Times describe an attempt to get more money for
unskilled laborers as an "assault" on the minimum wage?)

            The NYT , LAT and WP fronts all report that yesterday,
Monica Lewinsky dismissed her California medical malpractice attorney, William
Ginsburg, and replaced him with two experienced Washington criminal defense
lawyers, one of whom, Jacob Stein, is a former independent counsel. The
LAT and WP report that the new lawyers immediately sought to
improve their client's relations with Kenneth Starr by paying a courtesy call
to his office. The papers stress another post-Ginsburgian difference: standing
mute with their client before the assembled media.

            The Post goes into the most detail on the new team's legal
connections in town, its dispatch chockablock with law firm names. Everybody
looks down on lawyers who pay to advertise in the back of the paper. The goal,
apparently, is to be the kind of lawyer paid to be advertised in the front of
the paper. The Times interrupts its legal coverage to note that both of Monica's new guys are "well
tailored," with one "favoring customized French-cuff shirts" and the other
stepping out "in a chalk-stripe suit and spectator shoes." Do most readers know
what spectator shoes are? "Today's Papers" can only guess they are shoes so
expensive that most folks can only look at them in the store window, or on
their lawyers.

            That inquiry into the failure of U.S. intelligence to anticipate India's
nuclear tests, first tipped last week by the Wall Street Journal , has materialized on the front at
USAT and the NYT , and inside at the WP . The findings by
retired admiral David Jeremiah and his team: the intelligence community so
ignored the new Indian government's statements on nuclear policy that only one
U.S. analyst was assigned to examine satellite photos of India's test site.

            
               USAT 's "Money" section brings word that the chemical company FMC is
in serious talks with the federal government and Shoshone-Bannock Indian reps
to settle a lawsuit alleging that FMC's fifty-year-old shale extraction
operation at the tribe's southeastern Idaho reservation has left a significant
number of Native Americans with lung cancer and other respiratory illnesses.
The case, says the paper, could result in the largest fine in EPA history.

            A WSJ front-page feature reports on a virtually unnoticed obstacle to the flourishing of free
trade under NAFTA: There aren't enough bridges, rails and docks to handle all
the additional movement of goods the treaty sanctions. As a result, billions of
dollars of goods customarily sit for hours at the three borders involved, a
particular disaster in today's just-in-time inventory economy. Even though the
just-passed highway bill takes a crack at the problem, the real trouble, says
the Journal , is that any border infrastructure changes face a complex
international approval process that for instance, has meant one seven-mile
road/bridge project between the U.S. and Mexico has generated a fourteen-foot
pile of documents.

            The WP reports that Matt Drudge gave a speech yesterday at the National Press
Club. Plunging self-made into all that self-importance didn't seem to faze him.
"All truths begin as hearsay," Drudge said at one point. "Some of the best news
stories start as gossip. At what point does it become news? This is the
undefinable thing." When a questioner wondered how Drudge would fare at a news
outlet that requires 100 percent accuracy, he replied: "I don't know what
organization that would be."

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            White House of Blues

            
               USA
Today , the Washington Post , and the New York Times
all lead with the latest developments in the White House sex scandal. The
Los
Angeles Times goes another way, leading with the latest developments in
the White House money scandal (remember?).

            The Lewinsky matter moved Thursday on several fronts, which get covered to
varying degrees. The USAT lead reports that while denying any
obstruction of justice, Jordan said that he kept Bill Clinton informed about
his efforts to land Monica Lewinsky a private-sector job. USAT also has
the Post traumatic distress syndrome of Robert Bennett, one of Clinton's
private lawyers, as well as word that Ginsburg and Starr squared off before a
federal judge, but in both regards it leaves important details out. You have to
read the Post to learn that Bennett not only viewed the WP
deposition leak as "reckless, reprehensible and unethical" but also that he
said, "We are going to seek relief in court on this...." (Apparently, Bennett
didn't elaborate and the Post wasn't about to--after all, it's the
WP 's source Bennett is talking about going after.) And to learn that the
point of the closed hearing was so Ginsburg could try to convince a judge to
make Starr abide by a preliminary agreement to extend immunity to Lewinsky in
return for her testimony.

            Both the WP and NYT describe the wild scene outside the
courthouse, mobbed with press and topped off with anti-Clinton protestors
chanting, "Five-six-seven-eight! Married men don't date!"

            The two papers also detail Clinton's hot reaction to Thursday's Post
scoop: "the court has made it absolutely clear it is illegal to leak and
discuss" his deposition. Both papers report that all players in the
controversy--including Ken Starr and Paula Jones' lawyers--deny leaking the
depo. Also, the LAT front reports that Clinton "sternly refused" to
explain Thursday why in his deposition, he said he warned Monica L. that she
was likely to be called in the Jones case.

            The NYT lead plays catch-up on the depo story by pointing out that
the deposition's heavier than anticipated focus on Lewinsky makes sense of the
prior Times scoop about Betty Currie's testimony that, the day after,
Clinton went over with her the facts about his relationship with the intern.
The piece emphasizes how in the Clinton deposition account Currie is the
central figure, even to the point where it was her idea to get Monica a gift
when he went to Martha's Vineyard on vacation. The Times adds this
tidbit: Clinton said in his depo that previous accusations about drug dealing
and even murder had left him "paranoid."

            The LAT lead is the news that California campaign donor Johnny Chung,
who once compared the White House to a subway, where you need coins to open the
doors, will plead guilty to tax evasion, bank fraud and election law violations
in an agreement with the DOJ under which he will cooperation with the
Department's fund-raising investigation. The paper also reports that another
big Clinton donor suspected of funneling foreign money to the Democratic Party,
Yogesh Gandhi, was arrested Thursday on unrelated fraud charges as he prepared
to leave the country. The WP and NYT run the Chung story on their
front pages.

            The Wall Street Journal reports that military planners of
possible airstrikes against Iraq have become less confident of the U.S. ability
to bomb biological weapons sites in Iraq after a secret Air Force test in which
a special bomb that was expected to incinerate a stockpile of anthrax-like
germs instead spread them.

            While all the dailies were going front-page earlier this week with the news
that hands-on basketballer Latrell Sprewell was being given his millions back,
there was virtually no newsplay of his most recent escapade. It seems that on
Monday, Sprewell was involved in a car accident that sent two other people to
the hospital. The California Highway Patrol says Sprewell's Mercedes was
traveling at "high speed" when it struck sand barrel obstacles, hit a wall and
then collided with another car. Witnesses said they'd seen Sprewell speeding.
Perhaps the Highway Patrol fears another arbitrator in the wings. It didn't
give Sprewell a ticket. All this information comes from the only press coverage
"Today's Papers" is aware of--a brief AP item on page 4 of Tuesday's LAT
sports section. You know, where everyone put the news that OJ had pleaded no
contest to beating his wife.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Russian to Judgment

            Boris Yeltsin's dismissal of his entire cabinet leads at USA Today and
the New York Times .
The Washington Post goes with the Supreme Court's
decision to sidestep a "partial-birth abortion" case. (An FOTP coffee cup for
the reader who submits, the best alternative phrase, in TP's judgment, for the
procedure in question. How can someone be partially born? And doesn't
"Partial-birth abortion" seems about as logical as "partial-life execution?")
The Los
Angeles Times leads with the main economic reaction to yesterday's big
story about oil production cutbacks: a 13 percent rise in oil prices, the
biggest one-day percentage gain since the Gulf War.

            Yeltsin explained his move by saying his nation needed a fresh and powerful
team in place to pull it out of its social and economic crises. The biggest
name casualty was long-time Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin, widely viewed
as Yeltsin's heir apparent. In firing him, Yeltsin advised him to concentrate
on the next presidential elections, to be held in 2000. Odd or insincere
advice, given that the NYT says few give Chernomyrdin much of a chance
to win that election without the power of the PM's office or Yeltsin's
support.

            The NYT says theories about why Yeltsin fired everybody "swirled
through the capital like a cyclone." But give the Times credit for
putting forward its own clear suggestion: With Yeltsin's health problems much
in evidence of late, Russians were increasingly viewing Chernomyrdin as
Yeltsin's imminent successor, and "nothing infuriates Yeltsin more than the
suggestion that he has lost any of his political authority." The LAT ,
which runs Yeltsin on its front, also settles on this as the most likely
explanation.

            Although all the papers agree on the basic facts of the shake-up, their
takes on the emotions involved vary. The NYT says Yeltsin made his
stunning announcement in a "surprisingly folksy and conciliatory speech," while
WP says the speech was made by a "stiff-looking" Yeltsin, and the
LAT says he was "grim."

            The Post has some excellent detail on the mechanics of the firings.
Yeltsin, says the paper, met with Chernomyrdin in person and gave him a
farewell award for "Services to the Fatherland," while the other big names got
it in the neck on the phone. The Post account makes it clear that there
are Russian spin doctors too, by reporting that a Kremlin spokesman said
Yeltsin's moves "had been planned for a long time."

            The WP lead brings word that the Supreme Court, confronted with its
first chance to take up the issue of a particular vexed type of late-term
abortion, decided to punt, prompting an angry dissent from conservative
justices Thomas, Rehnquist and Scalia. On the other hand, abortion rights
advocates were cheered by the inaction. The non-move is also the USAT
off-lead, but doesn't make the front of the NYT or LAT . Both of
those papers find another judicial story more pressing: The California Supreme
Court's decision that the Boy Scouts can ban gays.

            The LAT , NYT , and WP fronts carry the news that the
federal government has indeed, as it first hinted over a week ago, decided to
try to block the Lockheed-Northrop merger.

            President Clinton's arrival in Ghana is front-page news at
the NYT , LAT , and WP . Clinton opened his 12-day tour of
Africa, says the NYT , by pledging more American interest and aid while
calling for a deeper African commitment to democracy and free markets. The
Times describes how the largest crowd Clinton ever spoke to--some half a
million Ghanians--surged against the barricades, threatening to "overwhelm the
president." The paper says Clinton, "his face contorted in anger, raged at the
crowd to get back." The picture on the NYT and WP fronts captures
the moment: It's the "Primary Colors" opening handshake gone mad. Clinton in
Africa also makes the LAT front.

            The WP reports that in the Lewinsky matter, the White House is
attempting to use its recently announced claim of executive privilege to cover
discussions involving not just presidential advisors like Bruce Lindsey and
Sidney Blumenthal, but also those involving Hillary Clinton. The paper points out that this indicates
how actively involved she has been in the White House response to the scandal.
Meanwhile, a NYT editorial calls the attempt to use executive privilege
in the controversy "an alarming attempt to extend presidential power."

            The Wall Street Journal "Work Week" column reports that
"Eighty-eight percent of CEOs surveyed anonymously report that they see a
connection between a worker's age and productivity. In a poll of 773 chief
executives in 23 countries, consultants Watson Wyatt Worldwide found that most
think productivity peaks around age 43." "Today's Papers" is sorry that the
Journal wasn't curious enough to find out the average age of those
CEOs.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            NYT Buries Lead!

            The Washington Post leads with indications that President
Clinton may drop his appeal of last week's court decision holding that his top
aides may be questioned by Kenneth Starr. The New York Times
goes with Clinton's comment Sunday that the U.S. would support new
international financial aid to Russia if its debt situation worsens. USA Today
leads with this year's big increase in killer tornadoes--nearly double the
twister death toll for all of 1997, and a 365 percent increase over the total
for 1996. The Los Angeles Times leads with the likelihood that Congress
will approve the most sweeping changes in bankruptcy law in decades--which will
make it significantly harder for those with annual family incomes over $50,000
to wipe out their debts. The WP lead is on the USAT front but no
others. Neither the NYT nor LAT leads are on anybody else's
front.

            Besides executive privilege, the WP reports that two other
legal decisions incident to the Lewinsky case must also be made soon: whether
the DOJ will challenge a court decision ordering Secret Service agents to
testify, and whether Clinton himself will testify before Starr's grand
jury.

            According to the NYT , Clinton's Sunday statement concerning debt assistance to Russia
was timed to spread calm among the Asian financial markets before they opened
for the week. A senior administration official tells the paper that direct U.S.
aid is not being contemplated, but rather IMF and World Bank monies, which
means 80 percent non-U.S. funds. The Times offers a helpful explanation
of the hoped-for result: once investors realize the U.S. and the international
funds are determined to support Russia, they will stop dumping the ruble, which
may mean that actually making the loans becomes unnecessary. This is, says the
NYT , "a form of deterrence theory." The story runs inside at the
WP .

            The Wall Street Journal runs a front-page story about how stockbrokers hustle clients . The techniques described
include pretending also to be on the phone with another client who just placed
a big order with the broker or who just made half a million dollars with him.
The big flaw with the story: it never says whether or not such ruses are
illegal.

            The LAT front points out a rather sticky dilemma now arising for the
U.S. in the wake of the new Asian arms race. The Indian and Pakistani nuclear
weapons are, the paper observes, probably, like the U.S. and Soviet programs of
the 50s and 60s, quite unsafe--vulnerable to both physical mishaps and command
and control mistakes. So the question is, should the U.S. help both countries
make their bombs safer? Although to do so would violate the new U.S. sanctions
imposed on both countries and could provoke international complaints that
America is spreading nuclear know-how, the LAT reports that "outside
analysts" think such a course of action is probably under consideration.

            A topic of immeasurable social and intellectual importance is very unwisely
buried deep inside the NYT business section: How could a story about
"Today's Papers" be so badly underplayed?

            A piece inside the WP reports that although the government has issued
30,000 letters authorizing the installation of airbag cut-off switches in cars and trucks, only 1,000 of
these have been accepted by auto dealers and service shops. The reason? These
facilities are worried about legal liability, but this doesn't add up, since
the story goes on to explain that the automakers have agreed to indemnify those
doing the cut-off work.

            The NYT has obtained a draft of a U.S. government report on Nazi gold taken from Jews--primarily as jewelry and teeth
fillings--during World War II, and writes it up on the top-front. Principal
findings: There was twice as much gold seized in this fashion as previously
estimated; it was used to pay--mostly in transactions handled by the Swiss
National Bank--for a huge share of Nazi war needs purchased from Portugal,
Spain, Sweden and Turkey; and two major German banks, Dresdner Bank and
Deutsche Bank, neither previously implicated and both now doing considerable
business in the U.S., had major roles in the transactions.

            Sunday's NYT "Week in Review" reports on the steady rise in volume
levels at the movies. The paper reports that a recent New York City showing of
"Bulworth" dwelt mostly in the vacuum cleaner range, except for when Warren
Beatty was rapping, taking things up to somewhere between jackhammer and car
horn. "Today's Papers" has been employing an effective countermeasure for
nearly twenty years: earplugs. These not only offer excellent protection from
hearing loss, but also from noisy theatergoers and inane movie dates.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Gore Tech

            
               USA
Today leads with the Senate's passage of a huge transportation-funding
plan, 38 percent larger than the one currently in effect. The New York Times
and Los
Angeles Times lead with the announcement that U.S. cancer rates have
declined in the past five years, reversing the trend of the previous twenty.
The Washington Post goes with the revelation that last
fall, just weeks after gaining China's pledge to halt assistance to Iran's
nuclear programs (elicited in return for allowing American firms to sell
nuclear reactors to China), the Clinton administration discovered and protested
China's secret negotiations with Iran regarding shipping it material used to
make weapons-grade uranium.

            The coverage of the transportation bill, which includes an LAT
front-pager and a piece inside the WP , generally stresses that its rich
provisions could be a budget buster. But the NYT front-page piece emphasizes a "little-noticed
provision" (noticed, however, also by USAT ) that would let employers
give workers up to $65 a month in tax-free mass-transit benefits (in the form,
for instance, of subway tokens and bus passes). This could, says the
Times , sharply cut the cost of train, bus and subway travel in New York
and elsewhere.

            The NYT notes that experts attribute the decline in new cancer cases
to changes in behavior, most notably a drop in smoking, and the decline in
deaths to increased screening and better therapies, but the paper also observes
that these positive trends are not equally benefiting all Americans.
"Minorities and women," says the Times , "remain particularly at risk."
While the USAT and WP front-page cancer pieces mention this, the
LAT cancer lead doesn't mention it before the "jump" to the inside.
Also, according to the graphic accompanying the NYT story, the biggest
increase seen in the most recent data is for melanoma of the skin, yet this
type of cancer isn't mentioned at all in the Times story proper.

            A piece on the WP front reports on an organized protest campaign of thousands of angry phone
calls, letters and e-mails directed at Merriam-Webster because of its current
dictionary's definition of "nigger" as "a black person--usually taken to be
offensive." The campaign was started by two Michigan women and has now been
joined by NAACP President Kweisi Mfume, who warns that if the company doesn't
bend, his organization will urge colleges and school systems not to buy its
dictionaries. The WP , historically very skittish in its treatment of
race, doesn't complicate the story with the inconvenient but true observation
that since most whites know better than to use the N-word epithet, and since it
has become a common phrase of salutation and even endearment among blacks, a
high proportion of its current usage is in fact as a synonym for "black
person."

            There's a lot of Al Gore's quote brilliance unquote suspiciously on display
today. The WP reports on its front that he literally dreamt of the idea
of making a live video image of the Earth as seen from space continuously
available on the Internet, and that after conducting twenty minutes of
Internet research, he quickly assembled a NASA team to make his dream a
reality. What's involved is launching a spacecraft that can be stationed 1
million miles from Earth. The WP reports that Gore suggests calling it
Triana, after Rodrigo de Triana, who Gore apparently knows to be, without
benefit of flashcards, the lookout on Columbus's ship who first sighted the New
World. Meanwhile, in the Wall Street Journal , Gore is depicted wowing the nation's
top computer executives with his fluent references to Immanuel Kant and Thomas
Kuhn. What controlling mental authority!

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            More Satellite Dish

            The Los
Angeles Times leads with the adverse affect on U.S. high technology
export businesses posed by the China/Loral satellite flap. The paper describes
the emergence of a trans-party coalition of anti-proliferationists ranging from
the liberal Rep. Edward Markey to the religious conservative Gary Bauer
(apparently, prolife does not entail proliferation). The Washington Post lead is the Loral CEO's proclamation of
innocence. The New York Times
goes with the U.S. military's increased dependence on reserve troops in
Bosnia.

            The WP lead is a near twin to the Sunday NYT front-page piece
on Loral CEO Bernard Schwartz. The broad outlines--that Schwartz has, since
first meeting Bill Clinton in 1992, been a big donor to President Clinton and
the DNC and that during that same time-frame, Loral has enjoyed solid
administration support for its efforts to sell communications technology to
China--are the same. And so are many of the details. There is one discrepancy.
The NYT suggests the oddity that despite all his donations, Schwartz had
been denied that supreme political plum, an overnighter in the Lincoln Bedroom.
The WP explains that he's been invited twice but his schedule has
prevented him from accepting.

            The focus of both pieces is Schwartz's denial that his largess was in any
way linked to his firm's increased access to China. Of course, when lobbying is
done skillfully, linking is unnecessary--the money speaks for itself. The
Times --but not the Post --makes the point, but not until after the
"jump," in the seventeenth paragraph.

            The NYT lead reports a striking fact: more Army reservists have been
called up for active duty in Bosnia than were called up during all of Vietnam,
and the episode marks the first time in nearly thirty years that a National
Guard combat unit has been shipped overseas. Unfortunately, the piece focuses
on the grousing of called-up reservists, instead of on the most important
question it raises--whether our part-time soldiers are trained well enough to
be depended on this way.

            The LAT 's "Column One" brings out another overlooked consequence of
military downsizing. Seems that budget cuts have forced the Pentagon to stop
supplying honor guards to most military funerals, and this role is now often
filled by elderly veterans.

            An excellently reported piece detailing how the U.S. missed India's nuclear
preparations appears on the NYT 's page three. (Can't imagine why it's
not Page One. Surely it's more pressing than George W. Bush's campaign doings.)
According to the Times , the failure was a "team effort," requiring flubs
by the State Department, the CIA, the Pentagon and the National Security
Council. The piece notes that three days before the Indian explosions, a
satellite recorded bulldozers appearing near the test site, but that this
didn't set off any alarm bells. But the piece doesn't say why. Surely this is
some sort of human breakdown, because the current generation of spy satellites
download their take in real time. Furthermore, says the NYT , early on
the morning of the test explosions, "one lonely analyst" saw a photo of fences
being removed, but it took four or five hours before more experienced officers
arrived to review the evidence. The Times doesn't say why they weren't
already there. "Today's Papers" can handle that one--because the more
experienced officers have rank, and insist that rank has its privileges, like
working during the daytime. Isn't that dumb? And isn't it lucky it was only a
test ?

            The LAT op-ed page runs a piece by a University of Chicago law
professor that promises "How to Stop Mass Public Shootings." The prof's
suggestion? Let citizens (without criminal records) carry concealed weapons.
Now, do you think if the teachers (and the other students, for that matter) at
that Oregon school had also been armed, that would have made the cafeteria
situation safer? After all, the boy pulled a knife on the cops in the police
station after he was arrested, and presumably he knew they were armed.
The professor adduces some statistics for his side purporting to show that the
availability of concealed weapons lessens the occurrence of what he calls
"multiple-victim public shootings." Unfortunately, he defines the notion into
irrelevance: it doesn't include gang shootings or shootings that are the
byproducts of another crime. (which means he couldn't even include the
Oregon shootings, because carrying a gun in school is another crime). In other
words, he excludes just about every shooting. The tip-off is that he notes (in
the seventh paragraph) that there are "21 such shootings annually"--not too
statistically significant, given that there are nearly 20,000 gun deaths per
year. Thank God for tenure, or this guy might be running a police department
somewhere.

            Headline writers and editors at the NYT were mostly home barbecuing
on Sunday. How else to explain the headline on page six of the national
edition: "Sukarno & Company: Out, Yes, but Still Hugely Rich"? Hey guys,
it's Suharto.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Elvis Leaves the Building

            Finally, after a solid week, some of the big dailies lead with monographs
that aren't Monicagraphs. The Washington Post leads with the indictment of Clinton
intimate Charlie Trie and another Democratic Party fund-raiser--the first in
connection with the Department of Justice's investigation into the 1996
campaign. (This story is the off-lead at the Los Angeles
Times , but the New York
Times runs it deep inside.) And the LAT goes with Madeleine
Albright's pronouncement that if allies can't be convinced, the U.S. is ready
to launch military strikes against Iraq on its own. Albright added that the
diplomatic string is running out and reiterated the U. S. position: U.N.
weapons inspectors must have unconditional access to Iraqi sites. (Elsewhere,
this story doesn't get that much play either: at the NYT it only gets a
reefer on the front page, below the fold.) USA Today
leads with a new poll indicating the strength of President Clinton's
post-scandal popular support, and the NYT goes with new details about
the last White House meeting between Bill and Monica.

            
               USAT says its new poll (of 684 adults, done in concert with CNN and
Gallup) shows that after his State of the Union speech, Clinton enjoys his
highest approval rating ever--67 percent. The paper also reports that former
White House chief of staff Leon Panetta was questioned yesterday by
prosecutors. (This news is also flagged in the Wall Street Journal front-page news box and on the
NYT front.) USAT also states that Starr investigators picked up
evidence from a former teacher of Monica Lewinsky's, who says he had an affair
with her.

            The paper also offers a glimpse into Monica's vie en scandale: long days
sequestered in the Watergate with her mother, watching TV and talking on the
phone in code. Her lawyer is quoted saying that she watched Clinton's SOTU
address. "She thought he did a good job with it," he says. "She thinks he's
done a good job as president. She still considers him a friend."

            Pursuing a thread first pulled by yesterday's LAT , the NYT and WP delve into that December 28th White House meeting
between the president and his ex-intern, prompted by her concerns over a
subpoena in the Paula Jones case. The Times reports Lewinsky claims that
Clinton told her at the time that she could testify her visits to him at the
White House were to see his secretary, and that he suggested that she could
avoid testifying altogether by being in New York City. The paper goes on to
point out that besides the issue of what Clinton actually said at this meeting,
it would be "ethically questionable" for a defendant in a civil lawsuit merely
to discuss the case with a potential witness already subpoenaed by the
plaintiffs.

            The Times says this meeting was confirmed by a White House aide,
while the Post says the White House declined to comment about it and has
refused to release the relevant entry logs.

            The LAT front and the NYT inside report an
increase in the number of applications to the University of California from
blacks (up 4.9 percent) and Latinos (up 7 percent). This confounds
much-publicized concerns that the school's decision to end affirmative action
last year would have a chilling effect on minority applications.

            Dick Morris' verbal incontinence yesterday about Bill and Hillary's sex
lives seems to have had immediate results. White House spokesman Mike McCurry
tells the Post that, although in recent weeks Clinton would occasionally
talk to Morris, "I doubt that will ever happen again."

            A big color shot of the president greeting an exuberant crowd of young
people sits athwart the NYT lead story about the Monica meeting and
astride its story about his trip yesterday to the Midwest. From just one
glance, it's hard to say which story the picture goes with. In a way, it goes
with both. It was in fact taken yesterday at Clinton's appearance at the
University of Illinois. But it captures the very same hands-on political body
chemistry apparent in those shots we've all seen by now of Bill with Monica.
Indeed, of the eleven people in the photograph looking up at and/or reaching
for Clinton, eight of them are women. They are all smiling at him.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Journalism's Pellet Surprise

            
               USA
Today and the Los Angeles Times lead with the latest U.S. economic news:
surging growth but the slowest rate of inflation increase in 35 years. The top
national story at the Washington Post is President Clinton's hard-nosed
self-defense at his first press conference in months. The New York Times
metro edition goes with the Senate's overwhelming approval of NATO expansion
(the earlier, national edition goes with the tax evasion indictment of
already-once-convicted Felon of Bill, Webster Hubbell).

            The WP coverage of the presidential press
conference--accompanied by a picture of a pugnacious double-fisted
Clinton--reports that he dismissed allegations about his character as the work
of organized foes "unable to counter his ideas or record," but acknowledged
that seven years of their attacks have diminished his personal standing with
the American people. This used to distress him greatly, said Clinton, but not
anymore. The paper observes that nearly half of the questions posed by the
press concerned his still-unexplained relationship with Monica Lewinsky, but
that despite his January promise to illuminate it, Clinton didn't answer
them.

            The NYT wash-up of the NATO vote explains that all 16
current members of the alliance must approve the change in order for it to take
effect. ( USAT 's front page NATO story says that such total approval is
expected by the alliance's 50th anniversary summit in Washington next year.)
The Times piece also includes a workmanlike exposition of the politics
of the vote, including the observation that expansion was supported by the U.S.
defense industry, which stands to "reap huge profits" from increased weapons
sales to new NATO members.

            The WP front features new federal statistics about teen birth rates (the story
runs inside at the NYT ) indicating that for the first time they are down
among every racial and ethnic group. Oddly, neither story includes any data on
teen out-of-wedlock birth rates. Highlights: The African-American teen
birthrate is down 21 percent since 1990--its lowest level ever. Hispanic teens,
while still the most prolific, have experienced a rate drop for the first time.
Non-Hispanic white teens are still almost three times less likely to become
mothers than either Hispanics or blacks.

            Earlier this week, the WP took a front-page look at the Pentagon's
troubled and expensive history with anti-missile defense systems. Today, a new
development in the arena gets covered by the Post , but is relegated to
the business section. Curious, since yesterday's award to Boeing of a contract
to develop a missile shield could be worth up to $5.1 billion. The LAT
whispers the story the same way. Which, is, of course, the way the defense
contractors like it.

            The Wall Street Journal front features an excellent story
uncovering a little-known problem: racial discrimination in farm loans. The paper describes
the attempts by some struggling black farmers to get restitution from the USDA.
Thus far, despite a four-hour meeting with President Clinton and an admission
by USDA secretary Dan Glickman that his department had swept the problem under
the rug, as well as numerous specific findings of illegal denials of loans, the
farmers are still waiting to be made whole. Scandalous.

            The LAT front covers a sensational, disturbing story likely to be much discussed in the
days ahead. Yesterday, during L.A.'s rush hour, near one of the city's busiest
intersections, a distraught man killed himself with a shotgun blast to the
head--while many Angelenos watched on one or another of the local TV stations'
live broadcasts. Afterwards, most of the stations expressed regret for the
coverage and some offered counseling to viewers.

            The episode could have a number of important consequences: Before taking his
life, the man had unfurled a banner reading: "HMOs are in it for the money!!
Live Free. Love Safe or Die." So perhaps the suicide will further crystallize
the discussion of the impersonality of managed care. (Why, by the way, didn't
the LAT mention the sexual disease-- probably AIDS--angle?) And perhaps
it will break the back of the L.A. trend of automatically going with
(invariably highly rated) live broadcasts of potentially violent freeway
incidents.

            The Hubbell indictment gets lots of ink and produces the day's strangest
quote. "The office of independent counsel could indict my dog. They can indict
my cat. But I'm not going to lie about the president. I'm not going to lie
about the first lady or anyone else." Hubbell's wife, who was indicted along
with him, must have been thrilled with this disclosure of the true family
pecking order.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            NATO's Rocky Road

            The LAT leads with the U.S. stating that finally, Iraq has really been
cooperating with U.N. weapons monitoring efforts. The top national story at the
NYT is the Senate's debate about widening NATO. The WP leads with the decision
by federal corruption investigators to let Jimmy Hoffa's son, James P. Hoffa,
run for the Teamsters presidency. USAT goes with the Treasury Department's
launch of an investigation into the tactics of the IRS' criminal division.

            The American admission was made Monday at the U.N. by U.S. Ambassador Bill
Richardson, about inspections of Iraq's nuclear program and previously
off-limits government buildings. But he went on to say that the U.S. continues
to oppose any relaxation of economic sanctions on Iraq or in the U.N.'s weapons
inspection program, citing, notes the LAT , Iraq's continuing
insufficient cooperation in the areas of long-range missiles and chemical and
biological weapons. This story also makes the fronts at USAT and the
NYT , but the latter emphasizes the U.N.'s decision Monday night to
extend sanctions despite Richardson's conciliatory remarks.

            The nuances of the administration's thinking about sanctions are on display
in a NYT front-page piece that depicts Bill Clinton at a White House
meeting of Christian evangelical leaders, unaware that a Times reporter
was there too. Clinton asked the group to withdraw its support for legislation
aiming to reduce religious persecution overseas by imposing sanctions because
he said such bills put enormous pressure on whoever is in the executive branch
to fudge an evaluation of the facts of what is going on." The president needs
flexibility, he said, including the ability to impose sanctions.

            The NYT line on the NATO expansion discussion is that this is a quite
important issue that wasn't receiving its due in the Senate until yesterday,
when "after four hours of dueling monologues, however, something novel
happened: Debate broke out." But judging by the Times examples, it
wasn't exactly Lincoln-Douglas. There was Sen. Joseph Biden saying, "The worst
time to enlarge an alliance is at a moment of threat. This is the time and the
moment, nine years after the wall has come down, to end once and for all the
artificial boundaries," with Sen. Robert Smith responding, "They picked winners
and losers at Yalta. We are picking winners and losers here." (The Times
helpfully explains that Biden is for expansion, Smith against.) And there's
Sen. Jesse Helms' contribution: "The European Union could not fight its way out
of a wet paper bag."

            The LAT lead editorial sees the Senate in a "reckless rush" to
approve NATO expansion, stating that supporters have pressed their case with
slogans, not arguments. The NYT notes that ice cream mogul Ben Cohen of
Ben and Jerry's is actively campaigning against expansion. In Thomas Friedman's
column, Cohen explains why: Expanding NATO would be like Ben and Jerry's still
wanting to drive Haagen-Dazs out of business even if H-D had switched to making
hot dogs. The problem here is that Russia hasn't gotten rid of its, er.ice
cream machines.

            The reader who makes it down to the fifteenth paragraph of the WP
lead gets schooled on what it means to be a clean Teamster. That's where it
says that the federal investigator who gave Hoffa the green light fined him and
several of his running mates in the last union election more than $40,000 for
receiving improper campaign contributions, and held that Hoffa "did not testify
accurately" about his personal involvement in the preparation of campaign
finance reports. By contrast, the NYT , in its front-page Teamsters
story, broaches this point in the first paragraph, and observes in the fourth
paragraph that as a result of the negative findings about Hoffa, neither side
in the upcoming Teamsters election can run as an untainted reform
candidate.

            The WSJ "Work Week" column notes that the machinists union has licensed a
special collector's item for its 110th anniversary: a Winchester Model 94
rifle. Wait till the postal workers union hears about this.

            That NYT piece that caught Bill Clinton speaking off the cuff about
sanctions also includes his confession that late at night he often gets a call
from Chelsea asking him about some item from the next day's paper that she's
read on the Internet, but that he knows nothing about. Mr. President, may
"Today's Papers" humbly suggest."Today's Papers"?

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Fashioning Paula

            
               USA
Today leads with Texas' settlement of its product-liability lawsuit
against the leading tobacco companies. The top nonlocal story at the Washington Post is the latest development in the Indonesian
economic crisis--a rare and boosterish Suharto press conference in contrast to
a further plunging stock market and food riots in outlying towns. The New York Times
leads with a comprehensive poll about American attitudes concerning
abortion.

            In the Texas case, reports USAT , the defendant companies have agreed
to pay about $15 billion over 25 years to reimburse the state for expenses it
incurred in the treatment of smoking-related illnesses. That makes Texas the
third state to settle such a case, joining Florida and Mississippi. There are,
says the paper, a total of 40 such suits on file, with Minnesota's turn coming
next week.

            The Wall Street Journal states that the plaintiffs' lawyers
hired by Texas to try the case will receive as part of the deal almost $2.2
billion in fees.

            The NYT abortion survey, the first conducted by the paper since 1989, was
based on telephone interviews of 1,101 people and detects "a notable shift from
general acceptance" of having the procedure: from 40 percent to 32 percent. And
the pollsters also detected an increasingly acute sensitivity to abortion
timing: Sixty-one percent of those polled thought abortions should be permitted
during the first trimester, but only 15 percent in the second and just 7
percent in the third. (The piece notes that this last stat helps explain why a
focus on partial-birth abortions has proven politically advantageous for
abortion foes.) Nearly 45 percent of those asked to state the present law on
abortion could not give the correct answer.

            The WSJ notes that the just-concluded football/TV deal will probably
mean even steeper cable bills in the near future. Some local cable
companies, the paper says, expect the fees they'll pay ESPN to go up more than
20 percent. And they're in the habit of passing expenses along to Joe Remote.
Even nonsports fans will be affected, notes the Journal , because ESPN is
usually part of basic cable service. (Which raises the question: Hasn't
technology progressed to a point that would allow cafeteria-style programming
choices by subscribers?)

            A scan of the headlines found cheek-by-jowl on the WP 's Page A6
provides an interesting snapshot of the life of the modern Cabinet officer:
"[Ex-HUD Secretary] Cisneros's Ex-Mistress Pleads Guilty," "[Labor Secretary]
Herman Denies Allegations of Influence-Selling Scheme," and "Two Tyson Foods
Executive Indicted Over Gifts to [Ex-Agriculture Secretary] Espy."

            The WSJ reports that, according to an MIT survey, Americans are twice
as likely to back a tax increase going toward the search for extraterrestrials
than one for gene-cloning research.

            The NYT reports that today's issue of the journal Science will
describe an experiment in which people's biological clocks were reset three
hours by shining a bright light on the back of their knees. The finding, if it
holds up, says the Times , may lead to a simple way for airline travelers
to fight jet lag.

            Yesterday's Los Angeles Times ran a story under the headline "Paula
Jones Works on Her Court Appearance," which, illustrated by pictures of Jones,
was all about the various looks she's had since stepping on the public stage.
The piece concluded that she's finally graduated to an image that's
"sophisticated yet soft." Today's WP "Style" section (that's the
opposite of substance, remember) picks up that ball and runs with it, with a
lengthy discourse on the new PJ. "It is," hyperventilates
the Post , one of the most jaw-dropping public make-overs ever." Jones
apparently has "smoothed the frizzy mane of curls that once reached to such
dazzling heights. Her makeup is now subtle and based on natural, not neon,
hues. Her clothing is inspired by the boardroom instead of the secretarial
pool. She has embraced the markers of dignity, refinement and power." In true
newspaper overkill fashion, the piece backs this up by consulting Cynde Watson,
